TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA
Qns: 5&6 in CW; Qn 7 in HW
Question 5. What do you understand by the following statements?
 (a) “We do many things, sir,” Nicola answered seriously. He glanced at us hopefully.
 Answer:
 When the narrator let out his misconceived notion about Nicola and Jacopo that selling and picking of fruits was their only source of income, Nicola tried to correct him. He told him that they did many things like taking the visitors to the places of interest in Verona like Juliet's Tomb. A hope of getting more business from the writer revived in his heart and his eyes gleamed hopefully. The narrator noticed this fact fully well.
(b) He coloured deeply under his sunburn, then grew pale.
 Answer:
 The narrator asked Nicola that they worked very hard and earned enough money but neither they spent it on clothes nor on good food then what actually they did with their money. On hearing the words of the narrator, Nicola blushed red with anxiety and confusion and his brownish sun-burnt complexion made it quite apparent to the eyes of the narrator and then suddenly his face became pale as he feared that now their secret that they saved. money for the medical treatment of their sister who was suffering from tuberculosis of the spine, was at the verge of being leaked out.
(c) He smiled uncomfortably. “Just plans, sir,” he answered in a low voice.
 Answer:
 The narrator asked Nicola whether they were saving money for migrating to America to have a better life. On hearing this, Nicola told him that they had some other plans. When the narrator wanted to know specifically what plans they had, Nicola tried to evade him simply by saying ‘just plans’ because he did not want to tell the narrator that they save money for getting their sister cured of tuberculosis of the spine in the hospital at Poleta.
(d) Yet in both these boyish faces there was a seriousness which was far beyond their years.
 Answer:
 The narrator was deeply impressed by the childish and artless expression of the faces of Nicola and Jacopo. They appeared to him to be very innocent and simple. But he also noticed a seriousness on their feces which could never be found on the faces of the children of their age. The narrator means that in their looks and age, they were innocent children but in their thinking and actions they appeared to be quite mature. The seriousness which maturity brings on the faces of responsible elderly persons was present on the faces of these two small boys aged thirteen and twelve.
Question 6.
 Answer the following questions briefly.
 (а) Why didn’t Luigi, the driver, approve of the two boys?
 Answer:
 Luigi, the driver, did not approve of the two boys because they had shabby appearance.
(b) Why were the narrator and his companion impressed by the two boys?
 Answer:
 Their innocent and courteous behavior impressed the narrator and his companion.
(c) Why was the author surprised to see Nicola and Jacopo working as shoeshine boys?
 Answer:
 The author was surprised to see Nicola and Jacopo working as shoeshine boys because he thought that they earned their living by fruit-picking.
(d) How were the boys useful to the author?
 Answer:
 The boys arranged American cigarette packs and tickets of opera for the writer. They could also tell the names of good restaurants.
(e) Why were the boys in the deserted square at night? What character traits do they exhibit?
 Answer:
 The boys were present in the deserted square at night because they were waiting for the last bus from Padua to sell newspapers to the passengers who dismounted the bus. This incident throws light on their characters. The boys were very hard-working and always willing to find and do work to earn money.
(f) The narrator asks the boys, “Must you work so hard? You both look rather tired.” The boys reply, “We are not complaining, sir. ” What do you learn about the boys from their reply?
 Answer:
 The reply of the boys shows their spirit of self-resignation and willingness to work hard. It shows that they were not working under compulsion but of their sweet will. It appears as if they had set an aim before them and the achievement of that goal was their sole concern.
(g) When the narrator asks the boys about their plans, they are evasive. Why don’t they disclose their problems?
 Answer:
 The boys, especially Nicola, happen to be very evasive when the narrator asks them about their plans. It is simply because they do not want to share their secret plans with strangers. It is quite likely that their sense of self-respect prevents them from becoming an object of pity.
Qn 7 in HW
Question 7.
 Discuss the following questions and write the answers in your notebook.
 (a) Appearances are deceptive. Discuss with reference to the two boys.
 Answer:
 This statement is true to a large extent in the case of the boys. The boys appeared to be quite dirty and clumsy in their shabby and ill-fitted clothes. But their poor appearances hid personalities which were very rich in human values and gentlemanly qualities. As the story proceeds further, their qualities are revealed to us one by one. Their shabby appearances also deceived Luigi, the driver of the narrator, at first. All the incidents and events which are described by the writer quite clearly remove the layers of deception. We come to know about their hard-working nature. Day and night they liked to work to earn money not because they were greedy and mercenaries but because they needed enough money for the medical treatment of their sister, Lucia who was suffering from tuberculosis of the spine. Clean and tidy hospital, the small cubicle of Lucia with a vase of flowers, a dish of fruits and a pile of books, reveal the loving care with which they looked after their sister. They spent only a meager sum of money on black bread and figs which they ate only to keep themselves alive. The major portion of their earnings was spent on the medical treatment of their sister. They may be shabby and dirty in appearance but their actions and intentions were not dirty. Rather they appeared to be shining gems of humanity.
They symbolize human love, spirit of sacrifice, complete dedication to one's cause, mutual trust and a great sense of honesty and sincerity, very rare to be found at a time when the war had dried up all fountains of human values and completely destroyed the moralistic outlook.
(b) Do you think the boys looked after Lucia willingly? Give reasons for your answer.
 Answer:
 Undoubtedly the boys, Nicola and Jacopo, looked after Lucia willingly. We see them working very hard day and night. They were always willing to work. Whatever job came their way, they picked it up without hesitation. They sold strawberries, they shined shoes, they hawked newspapers, they acted as guides and they earned sufficient money. But we never see them spending that money on their personal pleasures. They spent only a meager sum on black bread and figs. Even the writer made a guess that they must be saving money for migrating to America to have a better life. But no, later on, we come to know that they spent a major portion of their money on medical treatment of their sister, Lucia who was suffering from tuberculosis of the spine. The entire picture of the hospital and the information given by the nurse reveal the truth that they looked after their sister willingly. They paid hospital dues regularly without being a defaulter. They visited their sister at Poleta every Sunday. They covered the distance of 30 kilometers from Verona to Poleta on hired bicycles. They did not do all this under any compulsion or obligation. They loved their sister and cared for her. This emotional bond of love and mutual trust furnished them with a spirit of sacrifice and dedication to their noble cause. Thus, they looked after Lucia willingly.
(c) How does the story ‘Two Gentlemen of Verona’promise hope for society?
 Answer:
 The story Two Gentlemen of Verona has been written in the background of post-war time. The Second World war was over. The Germans destroyed towns and cities along with a general massacre. The furies of war dried up all springs of human love, kindness and faith. But in this story, we find that the flame of human love and sacrifice is kept burning by two boys whose lives were darkened by the blackout of war. They lost their father, their house and their happiness. But it is evident that war tortured them not only physically but their interior, ’ their heart and spirit ^lso did not remain untouched by evils of war.
Furies of war make men selfish, cruel, inconsiderate and inhuman. But here we see the two boys working hard to earn money, not for themselves but for their sick sister. They sacrificed their personal comforts. They wore old clothes and ate black bread and figs just to keep them alive and fit for more hard work. Their sole concern was to earn as much money as they could. They willingly and readily picked up every job which came their way. They did it, not out of greed but to save their only sister, Lucia from the jaws of fatal tuberculosis. They spent a major portion of their money to pay off hospital dues and to keep their sister well fed and well clad.
Undoubtedly, the character of Nicola and Jacopo set an example of noble humanity before the materialistic world of today. The story promises hope for modern society.

Mrs Packletide's Tiger
Why do people hunt? Complete the web chart giving various reasons for the same: 
Ans: 
 Read these lines and guess the answers to the questions given below
Why did Mrs. Packletide want to kill a tiger? 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide wanted to kill a tiger for pleasure and to compete with her friend Loona Bimberton who had procured a tiger skin and gained great popularity.
What does it tell you about her? 
Ans: She wanted to shoot a tiger as she was jealous of her friend and wanted to gain popularity.
What is the tone of the story writer? 
Ans: The tone of the story writer is humorous.
Do you think she was successful in her mission? 
Ans: Yes, I think she was successful in her mission.
What do you think the story is all about?
Ans: The story is about hunting a tiger for pleasure and popularity.
-
Read the extract and answer the questions that follow. 
Which line from the extract supports the idea that people had no doubts about Mrs Packletide missing her mark? 
Ans: the villagers anxious for their thousand rupees, gladly connived at the fiction that she had shot the beast
Select the option that correctly reveals the character traits of Mrs. Packletide
1. Miserly 2. Opportunistic 3. Blunt 4. Greedy 5. Pretentious
Ans: D. 2, 4 and 5 
Select the idiom that captures the central idea of the extract.
Ans: B. Sometimes a man wants to be stupid if it lets him do a thing his cleverness forbids.
Identify the writer’s tone in this extract.
Ans: Ironic and Satirical.
Select the option that displays the reason for Mrs. Packletide’s brief annoyance. 
Ans: B. The death of the goat. 
Answer the following questions in your own words:
What made Mrs. Packletide decide to give a party in Loona Bimberton's honour? What did she intend to give Loona on her birthday? 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide decided that once she shot a tiger, she would invite Loona Bimberton for a luncheon party. At the party, she would display the newly acquired tiger skin. The party would be an appropriate time to show off the tiger skin and talk about her tiger-shooting experience to Loona Bimberton.
Who was Miss Mebbin? Was she really devoted to Mrs. Packletide? How did she behave during the tiger shooting? 
Ans: Miss Mebbin was Mrs Packletide’s paid companion. No, she was not devoted to Mrs. Packletide. She made fun of the shooting and said that it would be useless to pay for the tiger if he didn’t touch the goat.
Mrs. Packletide was a good shot. Discuss. 
Ans: Mrs Packletide was a good shot. She did manage to shoot an animal although it was only the goat. The tiger merely died of heart failure caused by the sound of the gunshot.
What comment did Miss Mebbin make after Mrs Packletide fired the shot? Why did Miss Mebbin make this comment? How did Mrs Packletide react to this comment? 
Ans: Miss Mebbin said, “How amused everyone would be if they knew what really happened”. She made this comment to make fun of Mrs Packletide's shooting. Mrs Packletide said that no one would believe it. As soon as the tiger died, the villagers came shouting excitedly for they were happy to get their money.
Briefly comment on the behaviour of the villagers throughout the story. 
Ans: The villagers were very excited at the prospect of earning a thousand rupees. They posted children on the outskirts of the jungle to keep a watch on the tiger in case he wanders off to new hunting grounds. Goats were scattered to keep him satisfied and to prevent him from straying.
Did Mrs. Packletide achieve her heart's desire? Give reasons for your answer. 
Ans: Yes, Mrs Packletide was able to achieve her heart's desire. She got popularity. Her pictured fame reached from the pages of Texas Weekly Snapshot to the illustrated Monday supplement of the Novoe Vremya.
How did Miss Mebbin manage to get her weekend cottage? Why did she plant so many tiger lilies in her garden? 
Ans: Miss Mebbin tried to blackmail Mrs. Packletide by not letting out the secret if she would get her a week-end cottage instead. She planted many tiger lilies in her garden to remind Mrs Packletide about the big game shooting.
"The incidental expenses are so heavy," she confides to inquiring friends. Who is the speaker? What is she referring to here? 
Ans: The speaker is Mrs. Packletide. She is referring to the game of hunting.
Do you think the silent figure of Loona Bimberton in the background, plays a crucial role in the story? Explain.
Ans: Yes, Loona Bimberton plays a crucial role in "Mrs Packletide's Tiger" as a foil to Mrs Packletide's jealous behaviours and vanity. Bimberton is a London socialite who enjoys attention. Mrs. Packletide's desire to outdo Bimberton fuels her obsession with tiger hunting, ultimately leading to her guilt and anxiety.
Discuss the following questions in detail and write the answers in your notebooks: 
Do you think the tiger shooting organised by the villagers was a serious affair? Give reasons for your answer. 
Ans: The tiger shooting organized by the villagers was a serious affair because Mrs Packletide had offered a thousand rupees for a risk-free opportunity to shoot a tiger. A neighbouring village was chosen for the hunt. Motivated by the prospect of earning a thousand rupees, the villagers took extensive measures. They posted children at the jungle's borders to ensure the tiger stayed within the area and didn't wander off to new hunting grounds.
Do you think the writer is trying to make fun of the main characters in the story i.e. Mrs. Packletide, Miss Mebbin and Loona Bimberton? Pick out instances from the story that point to this fact. 
Ans: This humorous and satirical story mocks society through three women characters. Mrs. Packletide, jealous of her friend Loona Bimberton's fame from a tiger skin and press photos, arranges a tiger hunt. She offers a thousand rupees to shoot a tiger without risk and proudly faces the cameras, even though the tiger died of heart failure from the rifle's noise.
Miss Mebbin, hired to accompany Mrs. Packletide, is greedy and protective of money. She mocks Mrs Packletide, saying an old tiger should cost less, and later blackmails her into buying a cottage to keep the secret that the wrong animal was killed. The writer humorously notes that Miss Mebbin names her cottage "Les Fauves."
Loona Bimberton is portrayed as shrewd and spiteful. She boasted about her tiger skin but avoided looking at the paper featuring Mrs Packletide's photos. Her emotions are repressed as she writes a thank-you note for the tiger claw brooch. The writer humorously critiques the women's efforts to gain popularity.
A person who is vain is full of self-importance and can only think of himself/herself and can go to great lengths to prove his/her superiority. Do you think Mrs Packletide is vain? Give reasons in support of your answer. 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide is vain and envious of her friend Loona Bimberton, who boasted about shooting a tiger and facing the cameras. This envy drives Mrs. Packletide to offer a thousand rupees for a chance to shoot a tiger with minimal effort. Her competitive nature leads her to arrange the shoot, planning a lunch in Loona's honour and intending to gift her a tiger-claw brooch. She wants to outshine Loona by shooting a tiger and gaining media attention. She goes to great lengths, including hiring a paid companion, to ensure the shoot's success. Even though the wrong animal is killed, she boldly faces the camera with the dead tiger to prove her courage.
Sometimes writers highlight certain negative aspects in society or human beings by making fun of them. This is called a Satire. In your groups, discuss whether you would classify this story as a satire. Give reasons to support your answer.
Ans: The writer uses satire to mock the characters in the story "Mrs. Packletide's Tiger." Mrs. Packletide becomes jealous of her friend Loona Bimberton and arranges to shoot a tiger to get media attention. Satire highlights society's obsession with fame and the characters' moral shortcomings. Miss Mebbin blackmails Mrs. Packletide into buying her a cottage by keeping the secret of the wrong animal being killed. The villagers care more about the reward than whether the goat or tiger was shot.
How does the writer create humour in this story? 
Ans: The author makes fun of each character and situation. The characters of Loona Bimberton, Mrs Packletide, Louisa Mebbin and the villagers are all ridiculed for their peculiar character traits. The story is humorous. Mrs. Packletide arranges to shoot a weak tiger using cheap goats as bait. She is not a good shooter, so a platform is built in a tree where she sits with a rifle and patience cards. When the tiger sees the goat, it lies down instead of attacking. Mrs. Packletide fires, the tiger jumps, and then falls dead. Miss Mebbin reveals that the bullet hit the goat, while the tiger died of heart failure from the noise. The villagers, eager for their reward, pretend Mrs. Packletide shot the tiger. Her fame reaches Texas Weekly Snapshot.
Choose extracts from the story that illustrate the character of the people listed in the table given below. There are some words given to help you. You may add words of your own. One has been done as an example: 
Ans: 
Mrs. Packletide
(i) Competitive
(ii) Shrewd
(iii) Proud
Louisa Mebbin 
(i) Materialistic
(ii) Greedy
(iii) Humorous
(iv) Satirical
Loona Bimberton    
(i) Spiteful
(ii) Jealous
There are many amusing lines in the story. Here are a few of them. Rewrite each one in ordinary prose so that the meaning is retained. One has been done for you as an example: 
It was Mrs. Packletide's pleasure and intention that she should shoot a tiger. 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide wanted to shoot a tiger 
Mrs. Packletide had already arranged in her mind the lunch she would give at her house on Curzon Street, ostensibly in Loona Bimberton's honour, with a tiger-skin rug occupying most of the foreground and all of the conversation. 
Ans: Mrs Packletide had planned to give lunch at her house in Curzon Street in honour of Loona Bimberton showing everyone the tiger's skin rug that she had. 
Mothers carrying their babies home through the jungle after the day's work in the fields hushed their singing lest they might curtail the restful sleep of the venerable herd-robber. 
Ans: In order not to disturb the tiger, mothers tried to keep their babies quiet.
Louisa Mebbin adopted a protective elder-sister attitude towards money in general, irrespective of nationality or denomination. 
Ans: Louisa Mebbin cared a lot for money irrespective of anything.
Evidently the wrong animal had been hit, and the beast of prey had succumbed to heart-failure, caused by the sudden report of the rifle, accelerated by senile decay. 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide hit the wrong animal and the tiger died of heart failure because of the loud noise of the rifle. 
As for Loona Bimberton, she refused to look at an illustrated paper for weeks, and her letter of thanks for the gift of a tiger-claw brooch was a model of repressed emotions.
Ans: Loona Bimberton was jealous to see Mrs Packletide with the dead tiger. She unwillingly wrote a letter of thanks to her for the gift of a tiger-claw brooch.
An oxymoron is a figure of speech that combines normally contradictory terms. The most common form of oxymoron involves an adjective-noun combination of two words like- failed success.
The story ‘Mrs. Packletide's Tiger’ has a number of oxymorons. Can you identify them and write them down in your notebooks? 
Ans: Oxymorons: morbid dread, sympathetic hands, laud report, glad news, pardonably annoyed, disagreeably pleasant, gladly connived.

WRITING TASK 
10
Years later Mrs. Packletide writes her autobiography. As Mrs. Packletide, write about the tiger episode with the help of the clues given below. 
jealous of the applause Loona was getting-thought of tiger hunt--all arranged-- Louisa Mebbin accompanied; turned out to be a blackmailer-huge price to pay to outdo a rival 

Ans: My friend Loona procured a tiger skin and so she got all the honour at the press. I was jealous of her and thought of getting a tiger skin myself. I asked the villagers to make all the arrangements for killing a tiger and agreed to pay them one thousand rupees. I forced my friend Mebbin to accompany me for the hunt. We both sat on a platform placed in a tree. I pointed my gun at the goat tied under the opposite tree. As soon as the tiger approached clumsily, I shot at him. It sprang on one side and fell dead. The villagers shouted with joy. But Mebbin told me that instead of eating the goat, the tiger had died due to the loud sound of the bullet. I had missed the aim, Mebbin was cunning to blackmail me into buying her a summer cottage that she so much desired for not letting out the secret of the hunt. I was able to get the tiger skin but had to pay a huge price to outdo a rival.
Mrs. Packletide’s Tiger by Saki is seeped in rich wit and humour. Choose and describe the most Laugh-Out-Loud (LOL) moment in the story. Give at least three reasons as to why you think this is the most LOL moment. 
Ans: The story is humorous. Mrs. Packletide arranges to shoot a weak tiger using cheap goats as bait. She is not a good shooter, so a platform is built in a tree where she sits with a rifle and patience cards. When the tiger sees the goat, it lies down instead of attacking. Mrs. Packletide fires, the tiger jumps, and then falls dead. Miss Mebbin reveals that the bullet hit the goat, while the tiger died of heart failure from the noise. The villagers, eager for their reward, pretend Mrs. Packletide shot the tiger. Her fame reaches Texas Weekly Snapshot.
In groups of four, construct the dialogues and enact the following situations from the story: 
Mrs. Packletide and the headman of the village/other villagers discussing the details of the tiger shooting 
Ans: Mrs. Packletide: “I wish to shoot a tiger and I am sure this area is the most suitable place.” 
The village headman: “We can help you in the hunting, but it is not an easy job.” 
Mrs Packletide: “I will pay for the tiger”.
A villager: “we agree, but you will have to pay us one thousand rupees. We will surely arrange for a tiger and make all other arrangements.”
Mrs Packletide: “I am ready to pay the amount.”
Miss Mebbin blackmailed Mrs Packletide into gifting her a cottage 
Ans: Miss Mebbin: “If you want me not to let out the secret, that the wrong animal was killed, then you have to buy me a summer cottage, which I so much desire.”
Mrs Packletide: “I am sure you would not let me down. I will pay for the cottage.”
Loona Bimberton and a lady-friend discussing Mrs Packletide's hunting success
Ans: Loona Bimberton: “I cannot believe that Mrs. Packletide killed a tiger.” I don’t want to see the weekly.
A lady friend: “But I’m sure she did shoot.”



LISTENING TASK 
Listen to the reading of a passage on lion hunting and answer the questions given below: 
The Maasai tribe in Africa hunt lions because
Answer: (ii) they view it as a sign of bravery and personal achievement
Solo hunting has been banned because
Answer: (ii) of the declining lion population 
The hunting of lionesses is discouraged because
Ans: (i) they bear the cubs
The Maasai warriors chase a lion with rattle bells to
Ans: (iv) frighten it.
The Maasai use three parts of the lion. They are
Ans: (i) the mane, tail and claws
The tail is given to
Ans: (i) the strongest warrior
Extra Questions
Why did Mrs. Packletide wish to kill a tiger?
Answer: Mrs. Packletide wished to kill a tiger because her friend, Loona Bimberton had procured a tiger skin so she was jealous and wanted popularity for herself.
How was the tiger shooting arranged? What kind of a tiger was chosen for the purpose?
Answer: Mrs. Packletide offered a thousand rupees to the villagers to help shoot a tiger. A platform was constructed in a comfortable and convenient place in a tree where Mrs Packletide sat with her rifle and her paid companion Miss Mebbin. An old and feeble tiger was chosen for the purpose.
In what way did the villagers help Mrs Packletide shoot the tiger?
Answer: The villagers arranged for an old tiger, children were posted on the outskirts of the jungle, and cheaper kinds of goats were left to keep him satisfied. Mothers were made to keep their babies quiet so as not to disturb the animals.
How did the villagers react to the tiger’s death?
Answer: The villagers rejoiced as the tiger was killed, unconcerned about the details, only excited about their 1000 rupees.
The Letter
Look at the picture of the old man given below: Working with your partner, note down the feelings of the old man.
Ans: 
The old man seems to wait passionately for someone near to his heart.
His eyes are untiringly looking for somebody.
He is looking alone and lonely.
He was looking worried about the well-being of the person he was waiting for.
His positivity reflects his helplessness as well as the grief buried deep in his heart.
Can you think of reasons for these feelings? Discuss with your partner and note down possible reasons.
Ans: 
The pain of separation from family.
Realisation of past mistakes.
Grief over losing someone dear.
Loveliness and lack of sympathy.
Rash and careless attitude resulting in seclusion.
-
Answer the following questions by ticking the correct options :
Ali’s walking to the Post Office daily even in biting cold weather shows his
Answer: (ii) optimism
The Post Office is referred to as Ali’s “place of pilgrimage” as he
Answer: (iii) went there with faith and hope
The Post Master’s rudeness to Ali reveals his
Answer:(iii) preconceived notions
Ali did not come to the Post Office for several days as
Answer: (iii) he was unwell and not able to walk to the Post Office
“Tortured by doubt and remorse, he sat down in the glow of the charcoal sigri to wait. ” The Post Master was waiting for
Answer: (iv) Ali to deliver Miriam’s letter to him.
Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow
Select the option which displays an example of ‘make a game of’. 
Ans. C. Situation 3
Identify any two characteristics of the postmen that are revealed via their behaviour towards Ali. 
Ans. Insensitive and disrespectful
Give one reason why the writer refers to the post office as “One of the most uninteresting buildings in the world.” 
Ans. The repetitive task of gathering letters, locating addresses, and delivering them is performed by all staff, including the postmaster and postmen. This monotony leads to boredom, as there is nothing new to discover or learn, making the post office one of the least interesting places in the world.
Choose the option that displays the thoughts of Ali as he walks out of the post office. 
Ans. B Option 2
Identify two words from the extract that imply ‘without limits’.
Ans. Boundless and infinite
Answer the following questions briefly. 
Ali displays qualities of love and patience". Give evidence from the story to support the statement. 
Ans: Without a doubt, Ali exemplifies traits like love and patience. The story’s title reflects his unwavering love for his daughter Miriam and the extreme patience he displays in awaiting her letter. Every day, he arrives at the post office at dawn, sits on a bench in the corner, and waits for hours for the postmaster to call his name. Despite never receiving a letter from Miriam, his patience and love for his daughter remain undiminished.
How do you know Ali was a familiar figure at the post office?
Ans: Due to his regular attendance at the post office, Ali was well-known to all the employees. From the postmaster to the peon, everyone recognized him and could associate his face with his name. They typically mocked him for his peculiar behaviour, calling him a madman for coming to the post office every day despite never receiving a letter.
Why did Ali give up hunting? 
Ans: Ali stopped hunting because he grew physically frail and old. Though he retained his hunting instincts, the most significant factor was his separation from his daughter after her marriage. His loneliness made him realize that true happiness comes from being with loved ones. Thus, he stopped hunting, as it symbolized separation.
What impression do you form of the postmaster after reading the story 'The Letter'? 
Ans: The postmaster has two sides to his character. In the first half of the story, he seems hard-hearted and unsympathetic, with his face compared to a dull pumpkin, reflecting his insensitivity. However, as the story progresses and he finds himself in the same situation as Ali—worried and desperate for news about his ill daughter—his perspective changes. He becomes maddened with grief and realizes Ali’s agony and dedication in coming daily to the post office for his daughter’s letter. His fatherly sentiments awaken, and he becomes sympathetic and kind towards Ali.
The postmaster says to Ali, "What a pest you are, brother!" Do you agree with the statement? Give reasons for your answer.
Ans: To the postmaster, Ali appears to be a pest because he comes daily to the post office hoping for a letter from his daughter. Just as a pest constantly disturbs humans, Ali's daily presence becomes a heavy burden on the minds of the postmaster and his subordinates. However, Ali is neither aggressive nor malignant in his behaviour to truly deserve this label. Eventually, their hearts soften, and they feel pity for Ali.
"Ali came out very slowly, turning after every few steps to gaze at the post office. His eyes were filled with tears of helplessness, for his patience was exhausted, even though he still had faith." Why were Ali's eyes filled with tears of helplessness? What had exhausted his patience but not his faith? 
Ans: Ali had been unwell for many days, losing physical strength and stamina. His sickness tested his patience, and he realized he could no longer visit the post office daily for his daughter's letter. Aware that his days were numbered, he often had tears in his eyes. Despite his physical decline and the shadow of approaching death, his spirits and firm faith remained uncrushed. He believed that one day his daughter's letter would come, and his faith was rewarded when a letter finally arrived for him.
"Tortured by doubt and remorse, he sat down in the glow of the charcoal sigri to wait." Who is tortured by doubt and remorse? Why? What is he waiting for?
Ans: The postmaster's heart was heavy with grief and agony. He found himself doubting whether the figure he saw early in the morning was Ali or perhaps his ghost. Mentally conflicted and deeply distressed about his daughter's illness, he awaited news from her to ease his sorrow. At the same time, he hoped for Ali's return to dispel his doubts, which clouded his senses.
The writer carefully builds up an atmosphere of loneliness and grief in the story. Working in groups, pick out words/ phrases from the story that build up the atmosphere. Copy the following table in your notebook and complete it. 
Ans: 
Loneliness
Grief
(a) An old man was walking through the town, now and again drawing his tattered clothes tighter to shield his body from the cold and biting wind.
(b) His lonely way.
(c) Now he understood the meaning of love and separation. He could no longer enjoy the pleasure of hunting and laughing at the bewildered terror of the young Partridges bereft of their parents.
(d) A pitiable figure a century behind his time.
(e) From some houses came the sound of grinding mills and sweet voices of women singing at their work and the sounds helped him along his lonely way.
(f) Although the hunter's instinct was in his very blood and bones, such loneliness had come into his life since the day Miriam had gone away.
(a) The whole town was wrapped in deathly silence.
(b) ………… and for the last five years, he had no news of his daughter for whose sake alone he dragged along a cheerless existence.
(c) He reflected deeply and concluded that the whole universe is built up through love and that the grief of separation is inescapable. And seeing this, he sat down under a tree and wept bitterly.


Complete the table by explaining the following phrases/ sentences in your own words:
Ans: As one's life approaches its end, happy and pleasant memories from earlier years often help to dispel the dark shadow of approaching death.
In the early hours of dawn, as Ali made his way to the post office, there were no living creatures around him. Yet, he heard the singing of early-rising women, the grinding noise of hand-mills, barking dogs, and the footsteps of a worker. These sounds brought him solace and reassured him that he was not alone.
Just as an unfaithful friend hides his evil designs under the cover of loving smiles, cold weather makes people sleep longer in their comfortable beds, forgetting the biting cold and wind.
Evenings mark the end of the day's activities. Growing old, Ali abandoned hunting for a quieter life, making daily visits to the post office to await his daughter's letter. This change marked the evening of his life.
Ali learned in his later years that perseverance, love, and compassion matter more than causing harm. Love, essential for the world's creation, also brings inevitable pain from separation—a truth of human existence.
The writer compares the postmaster's face to a pumpkin—unattractive and empty of joy, only sadness visible, with a hard, emotionless expression.
During letter distribution, the clerk calls out names like a Vishnu worshipper reciting names during prayer—an analogy highlighting routine and reverence.
Initially haughty, the postmaster softened when his daughter fell ill. His grief made him empathize with Ali's patience and longing, reflecting his fatherly instincts.

LISTENING TASK 
You will listen to views about the Joint Family system in India. As you listen, complete the graphic given below. 
Ans: Causes of neglect of the elderly 
Diminishing concept of joint family
The pressure of modern life
Poor financial condition and job prospects
Individualistic aspirations of the younger generation

WRITING TASK 
Tortured by doubt and remorse, the postmaster sits in the glow of a charcoal sigri that night, waiting for news of his daughter. As he sits, he writes his diary. 
As the postmaster, write a diary entry in about 150 words outlining your feelings about the day's events
Ans: 
16th August 1960
Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.
Today I am filled with shame and guilt for my rude behaviour towards Ali, a poor father. Ali used to come to the Post Office daily to enquire about a letter from his daughter. Everybody laughed at him and made fun of him. I was no exception. I also insulted him and called him a pest. Today, when my daughter is not well and I am waiting for some news from my daughter, I realise the pain, agony and suffering of Ali. I understand his fatherly concern for his daughter. I am filled with remorse and repentance for my inhuman behaviour towards Ali. In the mail, while searching for my daughter's letter, I found Miriam's letter. Poor Ali had been waiting for this letter for so long. I have taken that letter and I wish to give it to Ali with my own hands as soon as he reaches the Post Office. I would repent for my misbehaviour by asking for forgiveness from Ali. Ali's heart and soul lie bare before me.

Extra Questions
(a) Who was Ali? Where did he go daily?
Answer: Ali was an old coachman. He went to the Post Office daily with the hope of getting a letter from his daughter Miriam who went away from her father after her marriage.

A Shady Plot
Given below is a list of words related to ghosts and ghost stories with their jumbled-up meanings against them. Match the words/expressions with their correct meanings: 
(vii)
(xiv)
(ix)
(xi)
(viii)
(x )
(xii)
(xii)
(iv)
(iii)
(i)
(v)
(vi)
(ii)

The title of the story is A Shady Plot. The dictionary defines the words as:
shady adjective 
(c) Quiet, dark, or concealed; hidden.
Plot noun
(c) the plan, scheme, or main story of a literary or dramatic work, such as a play, novel, or short story.
-
Based on your reading of the story above, answer the following questions by ticking the correct options.
The writer was overconfident about his ability to write ghost stories because ……
Answer: (iii) the readers appreciated his ghost stories
The sight of the ghost materialising in his room filled the narrator with ……
Answer: (i) fear
John wants the ghost to disappear before his wife enters the room and waves his arms at the ghost with something of the motion of a beginner when learning to swim. His movement shows his ………
Answer: (iii) desperation
When the narrator says his wife is never so pretty as when she’s doing something she knows he disapproves of, his tone is ……….
Answer: (iv) irritated
The ghost says “It’s all your fault”. ‘It’ here refers to ………
Answer: (iii) the narrator’s wife leaving him
 Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.
What does ‘we’ refer to in the above lines?
Ans- We refer to the ghost community.
Select the most appropriate option based on (1) and (2).
(1) ‘The case is brought to the attention of the main office, and one of us assigned to
it.’
(2) Helen says that she helped John many times when he was thinking hard.
Ans- D. (2) is the reason for (1)
Choose the most appropriate option which shows the speaker’s character with reference to the extract.
Ans- B. Gullible
‘We scout around…’What purpose does the scouting serve?
Ans- “Writer’s Inspiration Bureau” served the purpose of helping those writers who do not have any idea for stories
Select the option that displays the appropriate features that can be associated with task completion, as mentioned in the extract.
(1) organisation
(2) autocracy
(3) delegation of duty
(4) competitiveness
(5) need for recognition
Ans- C. (1) and (3)
Answer the following questions briefly.
Which genre of stories does Jenkins want the narrator to write? Why?
Ans- Hallock was the person Jenkins always turned to when he wanted a ghost story to be printed in his magazine. Jenkins described John’s ghosts as live propositions. Jenkins asked Hallock to write another supernatural thriller that would terrify people this time around since that is what readers desired as well.
Does the narrator like writing ghost stories? Support your answer with evidence from the story.
Ans- The narrator wasn't very confident as he talked about how he didn't specialize in ghost stories. Instead, he said that ghost stories seemed to find him. Even though his first story was a ghost story, he struggled for months to find inspiration for it. All of this shows that the narrator, while natural, stumbled into writing ghost fiction.
What makes Helen, the ghost and her other co-ghosts organize The Writer’s Inspiration Bureau?
Ans- The Writer’s Inspiration Bureau was founded by Helen and her fellow co-ghosts because they believed there were many authors seeking inspiration to write ghost stories who lacked ideas and had weak minds. Such a writer would be assigned a ghost by the bureau for them to produce quality ghost stories.
Why had Helen, the ghost, been helping the narrator write ghost stories? Why was she going on strike? What condition did she place for providing continued help?
Ans- The narrator got the idea for his ghost stories from Helen. She and other ghosts were tired of responding to questions from avid Ouija board users, so they decided to go on strike, feeling too troubled to answer trivial questions. Helen asked the narrator to convince his friends to stop using Ouija boards as a condition for her help in writing stories.
How does the ghost undermine the narrator’s faith in his ability to write ghost stories?
Ans- Helen tells the narrator that she had helped him write his ghost stories. She recalls the several occasions when she had leaned on the narrator’s shoulder and offered him suggestions when he was struggling to come up with ideas for a ghost story. Helen tries to explain to the narrator that he would not have been able to produce quality ghost stories if she had not served as his inspiration.
Why does John want the ghost to disappear before his wife appears on the scene? What impression of his wife’s character do you form from his words?
Ans- Lavina is a sensitive person who occasionally goes into hysteria. She would completely lose it if she caught John chatting with a ghost. Lavinia is so obsessed with new trends in clothing and makeup that John worries about how she might respond in such a situation.
Why does the narrator hesitate to be a partner to Laura Hinkle during the Ouija Board Party?
Ans- The narrator was asked by a ghost named Helen to convince others to stop using the Ouija board in exchange for help with writing ghost stories. The narrator is worried about how Helen will react if she finds out that he is now using an Ouija board to talk to spirits, so he hesitates to join Laura Hinkle at an Ouija Board gathering.
What message does the ghost convey to the group assembled in the narrator’s house? What is their reaction to the message?
Ans- Helen accuses John of being a traitor for lying about persuading his friends to stop talking to ghosts. She confronts everyone individually through their ouija boards and calls Mr. Hallock a traitor, leading to accusations of John cheating on his wife.
Do you agree with the narrator calling the assembly of women “manipulators?” Give reasons.
Ans- The narrator thought that everyone in the room was suspiciously staring at him. He referred to the group of ladies as “manipulators” for this reason. The women weren’t trying to control anything. They were just reporting what was happening at their Ouija Board.
Why does John wish himself to be dead? Also, explain Helen’s role in resolving that phase in his life.
Ans- John encountered a ghost named Helen, causing him to lose his wife and leading to misunderstandings. When Lavinia met Helen, she realized Helen was not a real woman and felt bad for accusing her husband of infidelity.
When confronted by Lavinia about his flirtations over the Ouija Board, John insists that ‘the affair was quite above-board, I assure you, my love’. Bring out the pun in John’s statement.
Ans- John tells his wife that his interactions with Helen the ghost have been completely above board. The pun is that above-board means honest and open but here it means that it happened above the Ouija board. 
John’s apprehensions about his wife’s reaction to her encounter with the ghost are unfounded. Justify.
Ans- John worried that his wife might lose it if she encountered Helen the ghost; nevertheless, when the meeting occurred, she spoke to Helen with assurance and was not at all frightened of the ghost of Helen. Lavinia sighed with a sense of relief knowing that Helen was just a ghost and not a real woman.
Answer the following questions in detail:
After her reconciliation with her husband, John Hallock, Lavinia writes a letter to her friend expressing how her relationship with him has almost been on the verge of breaking and what has saved it. Write her a letter.
Ans-
Evergreen Street
23 May, 2023

Dear Anne,
I'm sorry for not writing sooner. My life took a difficult turn and I needed time to sort out some personal issues. 
Last month was tough. You know how proud I am of John and his creativity. He's a wonderful husband and supports me in everything. However, honesty was tested when an Ouija board suggested he was having an affair with someone named Helen during a Book Club game. I was shocked and almost left him.
I'm impatient and can't tolerate infidelity. But it turned out Helen was a ghost haunting him. Can you believe ghosts exist in today's world? Anyway, I'm relieved I found out the truth. Everything's fine now and there's no need to worry.
I blame myself for overreacting and not trusting John. I should have given him a chance to explain. I've learned my lesson, though.Please tell me about yourself too.
Your friend,
Lavinia
John Hallock reflects upon his experience with Helen’s ghost and in retrospect he finds it quite amusing. All the same he is relieved that he is no longer plagued by it. Ironically, the same ghost inspires his creativity and he writes a diary entry reflecting upon the comical aspect of his experience. Write his diary entry.
Ans-
16th August 1960
Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.

Dear Diary,
I was just sitting in my study trying to come up with a ghost story when a real ghost suddenly popped up out of nowhere. It was pretty surreal, but then we started chatting. The ghost, who introduced herself as Helen, told me that she and some other spirits were planning to go on strike, which was unprecedented. Helen claimed she had been helping me write my ghost stories, leading to an awkward moment during my wife's Ouija board session. This caused misunderstandings and almost led to my wife leaving me. Thankfully, everything got cleared up when Lavinia met Helen, and it inspired my next ghost story.
The narrator and his wife reveal something about their character through their words and actions. We also learn about them from what other people say. Can you pick out the words that describe them from the box given below? Also, pick outlines and instances from the story to illustrate your choice.

shy arrogant loyal clever overconfident manipulative protective self- disparaging suspicious sceptical jealous fearless firm shrewd strong gullible sly creative loves novelty and thrills 

Ans-
John Hallock
4. I sat down to write a ghost story.
4. creative
5. His magazine was only one to print my stuff.
5. protective
Lavinia Hallock
1. Such as my wife’s shopping
1. loves novelty and thrills
2. Cure her of her tendency to take every new fad
2. spendthrift
3. John, why are you sitting in the dark?
3. suspicious
4. Looking as if I were some peculiar insect
4. Jealous

Gladolia, the narrator's cook, is an African. The language she speaks is different from that of the others. This is known as Dialect. A dialect consists of words or phrases that reflect the regional variety of a language. An author often uses a dialect to make the dialogue more authentic. Initially, a dialogue may seem a little difficult to understand. However, as you continue reading, the language becomes more comprehensible. Working in groups, write what Gladolia's words mean as shown. 
Ans-
COLUMN A
COLUMN R
A. Misto Hallock
(i) Mister Hallock
B. de Missus
(ii) The Mrs
C. sho t’inks you’s lost!
(iii) She thinks you’re lost.
D. she done ‘phone you dis mawnin’
(iv) She did phone vou this morning
E. fo’ de lawd’s sake
(v) For the Lord’s sake
E not to stop to argify now
(vi) Don’t stop to argue now
G. Is gwine t’ quit.
(vii) I am going to quit
H. I don’t like no hoodoos.
(viii) I don’t like voodoo magic
I. I’se done leP dis place
(ix) I am done with this place
J. I is
(x) I am

Read and understand the following ghost phrases and expressions:
a) To give up the ghost– to die or to stop trying
b) A ghost of a chance– a poor chance, not likely to happen
c) The ghost at the feast– something or someone that spoils your enjoyment by reminding you of something unpleasant
d) Ghost town– a town which most people have left, abandoned and deserted
e) Ghost-write- to write for someone else
f) Lay the ghost of something/somebody (to rest)– to finally stop being worried or upset by something or someone that has worried or upset you for a long time
g) Ghost image — secondary image, especially, one appearing on a television screen as a white shadow, caused by poor or double reception or by a defect in the receiver
h) the ghost of a smile – faint trace of a smile
i) As white as a ghost- very pale or white in the face
Now complete the following story by using the appropriate phrases in the blanks given below:
Ans: I was alone in a place that bore a deserted look like that of a ghost town. I increased the pace of my footsteps as I walked through the dark forest. I felt someone walking behind me. I turned immediately and spotted the contour of a figure in the form of a spirit. It smiled at me wickedly. I started shaking with fear and perspiring profusely when I felt its skeletal hand upon my neck. I woke up with a start, relieved that it was only a nightmare.
This was not the first time I had one. It all started when I watched a horrendous horror film with an eerie ghost character that had a scary ghost of a smile on its face. It had been almost a month. The strange thing was that I saw a similar face at the station the next morning. That was uncanny.
I was to attend a dinner at my friend’s at Northanger Abbey that night. I had decided to narrate my experience to the group that would assemble there although I knew there was a ghost of a chance that they would be convinced.
After everyone had finished pouring their drinks to themselves, I cleared my throat and started narrating my spooky experience. However, every one of the groups started accusing me of being terrifying and held me responsible for spoiling the spirit of revelry. I gave up the ghost and sat quietly waiting for the party to be over. Back at home, the fears returned. I knew I had to talk about my experience for somebody to feel better. I have now decided to write and publish my experience under a pseudonym. Only then can I breathe in peace.
-
Writing Task
Do you think a story has an atmosphere? Complete the following blanks to make up your ghost story by choosing the correct options.
She opened the cemetery gate (secret door/ spaceship’s hatch/ door of the cottage/cemetery gate/ door of the castle/ cockpit) silently (brashly/ loudly/ silently/stupidly/fearfully/ joyously). Standing in front of her was a terrifying (terrifying/ handsome/smelly/ anonymous/ tiny/ huge/ bossy) apparition (policeman/ spy) apparition/ which/ prince/ wizard) with a knife (wand/ rose/ rod/ knife/ scythe/ coded message) in his/ her (its) ghoulish (ghoulish/ bony/ beautiful/ fair/ manly/ gloved/magical) hand
Answer:
(a) cemetery gate
(b) fearfully
(c) terrifying
(d) apparition
(e) scythe
(f) bony
Now that you have shared a ghost story/anecdote as well as completed a guided story in the class, create your own ghost story on the basis of the starters given below:
Stephen knew he would never sleep. The noises, those horrid sounds, would keep him awake…
Tap, tap, tap. Was it the branches of the nearby tree, or fingernails against the window?
People often say, ‘There’s no such thing as ghosts….
Answer: Stephen had to move with his parents to a remote villa in the countryside where his father worked as a forest ranger in India. Local stories spoke of an apparition haunting the area, and villagers believed in witchcraft. Stephen found the atmosphere eerie, though his parents were sceptical. Evenings brought unsettling sounds from the village, attributed to the witch doctor warding off evil spirits.
One cold, rainy night, Stephen was awakened by a scratching on his window. Peering into the darkness, he saw a strange shape trying to open it. Frightened, he grabbed a flashlight and ran to his parents, but they found nothing amiss except for the witch doctor's distant cries. Stephen fell ill, prompting his father to move them to the city. Yet, the mystery persisted, with locals claiming a strange figure haunted the village on moonlit nights.
And they say, ‘There is no such thing as ghosts’.

-
Listening Task
Listen to the extract from The Canterville Ghost by Oscar Wilde and complete the following tasks as directed.
Answer the following questions :
The Ghost loved the stormy weather because ….. 
Ans- (iv) Such weather was ideal for frightening the people in the house
The Ghost was particularly angry with Washington and wished to frighten him because ….. 
Ans- (i) It was Washington who kept on removing the famous Canterville blood stain by using his Pinkerton’s Paragon detergent.
The Ghost did not wish to frighten Virginia because ….. 
(ii)She has never insulted him and was pretty and gentle.
The Ghost was most angry with ….. 
(iv) The Twins
Write two striking qualities of the Ghost as are revealed in this extract.
(i)Scheming: He carefully planned to avenge.
(ii)Determined: He was determined to teach the kids a lesson.

Extra Questions
The narrator earns his living by ……
(i) writing ghost stories
(ii) working as a reader for a magazine
(iii) working as a stenographer
(iv) working as an accountant in a lumber company
Answer:(i) writing ghost stories
The ghost wanted John to
(i) stop his wife from using the Ouija board
(ii) stop using the Ouija board himself
(iii) stop his guests from using the Ouija board
(iv) stop people from using the Ouija board
Answer: (iv) stop people from using the Ouija board
Gladolia wishes to leave the narrator’s house as ……….
(i) she does not like the Ouija boards
(ii) she is afraid of the ghost
(iii) she is afraid of magic and hoodoo
(iv) she likes Ouija boards and hoodoo
Answer: (iii) she is afraid of magic and hoodoo



Patol Babu, Film Star
-
-
Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.
Choose the option that describes the main reason which was the trigger for Patol Babu’s chain of thought that made him question his presence at the film shoot.
Ans- D. He was wasting a great Sunday doing something so small and insignificant
Choose the correct option.
Assertion: Patol Babu felt silly for getting his hopes high.
Reason: He was convinced that he could never be a successful actor.
Ans- A. Assertion is true but the reason is false.
Patol Babu thought that Things were much better on the stage, because_______.
Ans- D. theatre was more suited to his talents as an actor.
Infer Patol Babu’s tone as reflected in the extract.
Ans- B. angry and regretful
The writer uses questions in his writing. Comment on the purpose of this style.
Ans- The writer uses questions in his writing for dramatic effect. These questions aren’t meant to be answered by the audience. They are mostly employed when the speaker or writer wants to highlight or elicit certain feelings or actions.
Answer the following questions briefly
Nishikanto’s offer stirred Patol Babu to the core. Comment.
Ans- Patol Babu had a passion for acting and theatre. So, when his neighbour suggested that Patol Babu may play a potential role in a movie, Patol Babu initially expressed great hesitation. He was pleased to get such an offer at his age but he eventually started building castles in the air as the idea gradually began to permeate his mind and spirit.
How did Patol Babu react? Why?
Ans- Patol Babu was taken aback by the acting offer. He was surprised as it seemed unbelievable to him that a 52-year-old nobody like him was getting a chance to act in a film.
Why did Patol Babu lose his first job in Calcutta?
Ans- The Second World War had resulted in Patol Babu being retrenched from his nine-year-old clerical job at Hudson and Kimberley.
How does Patol Babu reconcile to the dialogue given to him?
Ans- Initially shocked by his monosyllabic dialogue, Patol Babu's perspective shifts after rehearsing. He recalls his mentor's analogy that every word in a play is like a fruit on a tree—hard to reach for everyone. This inspires him to deliver his role with deep conviction, knowing the value of each word to the audience.
Who was Mr Pakrashi? How do his words help Patol Babu in enacting his role?
Ans- Mr. Pakrashi, Patol Babu's mentor, advised him, "No matter how small the part, never consider it beneath your dignity to accept." These words deeply influenced Patol Babu, giving him the confidence, motivation, and pride necessary to perform his role with energy and vigour.
‘Patol Babu was a meticulous man’. Elucidate.
Ans- Patol Babu was a meticulous man. This can be seen in the instances from the story. He reached the shooting site on time and in the attire, he was asked to wear. He asked for his lines because he wished to rehearse them before his scene was shot.
Money and satisfaction are like parallel banks of a stream. How does this statement correspond to Patol Babu’s emotion after the shot is over?
Ans- Patol Babu learns that personal satisfaction matters more than money. At first, he's surprised by his small role, but he finds deep joy in acting. For him, contributing to the film and portraying a character mean more than earning money. He acts out of passion and love for his craft, not just for financial gain. This shows the value of following one's desires and finding fulfilment beyond money.
Why did Mr. Mullick turn down Patol Babu’s request for a rehearsal?
Ans- Mullick turned down his request for the rehearsal, showing impatience at his suggestion. This was because Mr. Mullick wanted to quickly shoot the scene in the sunlight and he could see a large patch of cloud approaching the Sun, which was making him impatient.
What were the special touches that Patol Babu gave to his role to make it more authentic?
Ans- Patol Babu rehearsed the exact number of steps for colliding with the hero, added a small grey moustache to his look and held a newspaper open in his hand. These were the special touches which he gave to his look to make his role seem more authentic.
Discuss the following questions in detail and write the answers in your notebooks:
‘I hope the part calls for some dialogue?’ Who says this? Why does he /she ask this question?
Ans- Patol Babu used to be a stage actor for many years before he had to move to Calcutta for work. He was a very passionate actor and was obsessed with acting. People used to buy tickets just to see him perform. After many years, he was surprised and happy to be offered a role in a film. When he enquired about his role, he found out that he was given the role of a pedestrian. He wanted to know if the role involved any dialogues because he was keen to showcase his acting skills.
‘Were these people pulling his leg? Was the whole thing a gigantic hoax? A meek, harmless man like him, and they had to drag him into the middle of the city to make a laughing stock out of him. How could anyone be so cruel?’ Why does Patol Babu
have these thoughts?
Ans- Patol Babu was shocked when he received his dialogue for his first film role. He had previously only acted on stage, so he was excited for the opportunity. However, when he arrived on set and learned that his only line was to say "oh" after colliding with the hero, he felt disappointed. He had hoped for a small role with actual dialogues, but instead, he was left with just a monosyllable to utter.
Patol Babu is an amateur actor for whom a walk-on part in a movie turns into an ultimate challenge. Discuss.
Ans- Patol Babu starts off feeling disappointed about his small role. However, he recalls his mentor's advice to never look down on any role, no matter how small. Encouraged by these words, he decides to rehearse diligently before the final shoot.
Finding a quiet spot, he practices his part. During rehearsals, he discovers that even a single word can be delivered in various ways, each conveying different meanings. He also prepares his physical reactions for the scene, planning to twist his face in pain, fling his arms, and crouch to show surprise and pain. 
With dedication and hard work, Patol Babu perfects his role and delivers a flawless performance.
Do you agree with the statement that Patol Babu is a practical man who comes to terms with whatever life has to offer? Give reasons for your answer.
Ans- Patol Babu loved acting, so when he received an acting offer, he accepted it eagerly. Despite feeling initially disappointed by the smallness of the role, he performed it perfectly without expecting any payment. Patol Babu believed that what truly mattered in acting was the quality of the performance, regardless of the size of the role. This shows that he was a pragmatic individual who embraced opportunities as they came.
Why does Patol Babu walk away before he can be paid for his role? What does this reveal about his character?
Ans- Although Patol Babu performed a small role, he felt that taking money for it would be trivialising his performance. He was a true actor for whom creative satisfaction was foremost and not money.
Do you think making a movie is an easy job? Discuss with reference to the story.
Ans- The story "Patol Babu, a Film Star," describes the challenges of filming, such as extensive rehearsals, expensive equipment, working in front of large crowds, and dealing with bad weather. Overall, making a film involves the collective effort of many people.
Here are some lines from the lesson. What do they tell us about Patol Babu’s character? You may take help from the words given in the table below or find some of your own from the dictionary. The first one has been done for you:

Ans-
That an offer to act in a film could come to a 52-year-old nonentity like him was beyond his wildest dreams unassuming; modest
Indeed, there was a time when people bought tickets especially to see him Talented, 
‘I was with Hudson and Kimberley for nine years and wasn’t late for a single day.’ Punctual
It didn’t matter if the part was small, but, if he had to make the most of it, he had to learn his lines beforehand. How small he would feel if he muffed in the presence of so many people Meticulous
Patol Babu cleared his throat and started enunciating the syllable in various ways. Along with that, he worked out how he would react physically when the collision took place–how his features would be twisted in pain, how he would fling out his arms, how his body would crouch to express both pain and surprise–all these he performed in various ways in front of a large glass window. Passionate Actor
(f) he indeed needed money very badly, but what were twenty rupees when measured against the intense satisfaction of a small job done with perfection and Dedication? Humble
Here are some lines from the lesson. Match the meanings of the underlined words with their meanings listed below
Ans-

-
-
Writing Task
Patol Babu writes a letter to Nishikanto Ghosh to thank him for being instrumental in his getting a role in a film. He also shares his experience at the film shoot including the excitement and deep satisfaction that he derived from the same. Write the letter in about 200 words.
Ans-
2, Nepal Bhattacharji Lane
Kolkata
Dear Nishikanto Babu,
How are you? Hope you are doing fine. It was indeed a pleasure meeting you the other day. I wanted to thank you for recommending me for the acting role.
I was surprised to receive an offer to act after many years. Knowing my love for acting, I couldn't refuse. When I arrived at the film location, I noticed how different it was from stage acting. There were new things like cameras, lights, makeup artists, and production staff that I hadn't experienced before. At first, I wasn't happy with my small role and minimal dialogue. But with guidance from my mentor, I practised and performed my part perfectly. I believe it was my best performance yet.
I am very grateful to you as it was because of you that I had this fantastic experience in the first place. I must also add that your brother-in-law is a thorough gentleman. He took good care of me. Thanks again.
Yours truly,
Patol Babu
Listening Task
Listen to the passage on character actors and complete the exercise as directed. 
Supporting roles are those roles that do not affect the plot or the subject of the film.
Ans, True
People become character actors chiefly because
Answer: (i) they like doing supporting roles
‘star quality’ refers to things like
Answer: (i) good looks and acting talent 
After the age of forty the actors most likely to get less work are
Answer: (i) character actors 
The chief advantage of being a character actor is that
Answer: (ii) they can act for as long as they like
Extra Questions
(a) What was the news that Nishikanto Ghosh gave Patol Babu? 
Answer: Patol Babu was just to go out when Nishikanto Babu called on him. He told Patol Babu that his youngest brother-in-law was in the film production department and he was looking for an actor for a scene in a film they were shooting. A character should be fifty-ish, short and bald. So he gave him Patol Babu’s address. They would pay him, of course

Virtually True
Answer the following questions. 
According to the newspaper, what had happened to Sebastian Shultz? 
Ans- Sebastian Shultz suffered severe injuries in a car accident. He went into a coma. Doctors classified his condition as serious yet stable. Sebastian was unconscious despite the best efforts of the medics. 
‘Dad’s nutty about computers.’ What evidence is there to support this statement? 
Ans- The narrator’s father was particularly obsessed with computers since he purchased several of them at the Computer Fair. He purchased speakers, a printer, a modem, a scanner, a 1.2 GB hard drive, a Pentium processor, RAM, and 16-speed CD ROMs. 
In what way did the second game seem very real? 
Ans- The second game was DRAGON QUEST. The narrator imagined himself strolling through the dragon’s castle while it was pursuing them; he experienced a true pursuit and even felt the dragon’s scorching breath on his face. 
The last game has tanks, jeeps, helicopters and guns. Which headings would you put this and the other games under? 
Ans- Warzone falls under the category of simulation games. Wildwest is a strategy game. Jailbreak is an action game, whereas Dragonquest is a fantasy role-playing game. 
What was Michael’s theory about how Sebastian had entered the games? 
Ans- According to Michael, Sebastian likely hit his head during the incident, and his memory was stored in the computer. Michael bought several video games at the fair, some of which were Sebastian’s stolen property. While Michael played these games, the computer was trying to access Sebastian’s memory.
Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow: 
What can be inferred about Michael from his words, ‘I knew my task’? 
Ans- C. resolution 
What is the given extract about? 
Ans- D. The progression of an escape 
Pick the option that DOES NOT use the word ‘dodging ’ as utilised in the extract. 
Ans- A. He is filling a worksheet of dodging tables.
Select the option that is true for the two statements given below. 
(1) The boys raced down the corridors. (2) Michael has a clear plan for the escape. 
Ans- A. (2) is the reason for (1) 
Cite an example of personification from the extract. 
Ans- Skeleton Swipe Card
Answer the following questions briefly. 
Why did the news of the ‘miracle recovery’ shock Michael? 
Ans- Sebastian Shultz’s miraculous recovery news startled Michael because he didn’t believe that Sebastian Shultz could be the boy he had just met. He had been seriously hurt in a car accident six weeks ago, and the hospital categorised his condition as critical but stable. His parents were informed that the boy was in a coma. Sebastian didn’t regain consciousness. 
Michael’s meeting with Sebastian Shultz had been a chance meeting. Where did it take place and how? 
Ans- When Sebastian Shultz was seriously hurt in the video game, Michael happened to run into him. When he hit his head during the accident, his memory was recorded on a computer. When Michael played the game, he entered into Sebastian’s memory and so he met him. 
What kind of computers fascinated Michael and his dad? Why? 
Ans- Michael and his father were intrigued with computers that had a Pentium 150 Mhz CPU, 256 MB of RAM, a 1.2 Gb hard drive, and a 16-speed CD ROM, replete with speakers, a printer, a modem, and a scanner because they could do everything. Even when his schoolwork was terrible, it still looked amazing because he would paint, play music, and make displays. 
Describe the first place where Michael was virtually transported. 
Ans- Michael was walking through the town, down the sandy road. There was a Sheriff’s badge pinned on his shirt, he was virtually transported into a saloon. 
What help did Sebastian Shultz ask Michael for? How did he convey this message?
Ans- After getting shot in 'Wildwest', Sebastian Shultz groaned and leaned on Michael, signalling the match's end. Michael saw the printer activate and grabbed a sheet showing Sebastian in casual clothes with a plea: "I’M STUCK. PLEASE HELP RETRIEVE ME. TRY DRAGONQUEST — Sebastian Shultz."
Why did Michael fail in rescuing Sebastian Shultz the first time? 
Ans- Sebastian Shultz wasn't saved by Michael initially. A second Sheriff suddenly appeared, looking like a computer image but moving like someone Michael's age. Michael followed him urgently through a hallway past several men and back to the tavern. The second Sheriff swiftly mounted a horse, and they rode off. Sebastian Shultz reacted with fear to a gunshot's sound.
The second attempt to rescue Sebastian Shultz too was disastrous. Give reasons. 
Ans- The game's goal was to rescue the princess from a tower, but the second attempt to save Sebastian Shultz failed. Another knight appeared from the wardrobe, revealing, "I'm the one who needs saving." Michael realized it was Sebastian and used the princess's long plaits to descend from the tower. As they descended, the dragon pursued, fixated on Sebastian alone. Michael was powerless to intervene in these events.
Narrate the accident that injured Sebastian Shultz. 
Ans- Sebastian was playing a game when his car crashed, severely injuring him. His head struck his laptop, causing him to lose consciousness and enter a coma. At the General Hospital, his condition was critical but stable. Despite the medics' efforts, Sebastian remained in a coma.
How had Sebastian Shultz entered the games? 
Ans- Sebastian was playing one of the same psycho-drive games that Michael had bought on his laptop when the incident happened. The computer had saved his memories when he hit his head in the accident. 
How was Sebastian Shultz’s memory stored on Michael’s disk? How did Michael discover that? 
Ans- Michael found Sebastian Shultz's memories on his disc while he was in the hospital. Games that belonged to Sebastian were stolen and sold to Michael's father at a computer expo, so Michael restored them to his disc when he played them. Sebastian had a near-death experience, recovered, and later shared his story with classmates at school. Michael discovered this connection.
Sebastian Shultz had a close brush with death. After he recovers, he returns to school and narrates his experience to his classmates. As Sebastian Shultz, narrate your experience. 
Ans - Hi everyone! I'm thrilled to be back after a terrifying experience. Six weeks ago, I was in a car accident while traveling with friends. I slipped into a coma, but miraculously recovered. Unfortunately, my laptop and game collection were stolen from the hospital. However, one of the stolen games ended up with Michael, who restored it on his device. I'm eager to meet him soon. It's great to be back with you all again!

Continue the story. 
Will Michael and Sebastian Shultz meet in real life? Will they be friends? Will they try to re-enter the virtual world together? You may use the following hints: 
• How the accident occurred 
• Transfer of memory 
• Meeting with Michael 
• Appeals for help 
• Rescue and recovery 
Ans- After a coma, Sebastian's video games were stolen and sold to Michael. Later, Michael encountered Sebastian online, trapped in a psycho-drive game. Michael rescued Sebastian after three attempts. They exchanged emails, and Sebastian thanked him. They arranged to meet in person at a café, where they had a comfortable conversation about school, family, and games. They parted ways, promising to stay connected online and offline.
Put the following sentences in a sequential order to complete the story. 
Sebastian Shultz was badly injured in a motorway accident and went into a coma. 
Sebastian’s memory was saved on the computer when he banged his head on it during the accident. 
When Michael played the game, he entered Sebastian’s memory. 
Michael bought the latest psycho-drive games from the computer fair. 
Sebastian Shultz was the second Sheriff in the ‘Dragonquest’. 
Michael pulled Sebastian into the helicopter and the screen flashed a score of 40,000,000. 
Sebastian requested Michael to try ‘Jailbreak’. 
Sebastian failed to save the boy who fell through the air. 
Sebastian thought the helicopter was the right idea and they should go into the ‘Warzone’. 
The games were stolen from Shultz’s house. 
Sebastian thanks Michael for saving his life and asks him to keep the games.
Ans:
1(a) Sebastian Shultz was badly injured in a motorway accident and went into a coma. 
2(b) Sebastian’s memory was saved in the computer when he banged his head on it during the accident. 
3(d) Michael bought the latest psycho-drive games from the computer fair. 
4(j) The games were stolen from Shultz’s house. 
5(c) When Michael played the game, he entered Sebastian’s memory. 
6(e) Sebastian was the second sheriff in ‘Dragonquest’. 
7(g) Sebastian requested Michael to try ‘Jailbreak’. 
8(h) Sebastian failed to save the boy who fell through the air. 
9(i) Sebastian thought the helicopter was the right idea and they should go into the ‘Warzone’. 
10(f) Michael pulled Sebastian into the helicopter and the screen flashed a score of 40,000,000. 
11(k) Sebastian thanks Michael for saving his life and asks him to keep the games. 

Writing Task
7. Do you think it is a true story? Could it happen to you one day? Here are some opinions about computer games in general. 
Ans- It is a “virtually true” story but is not entirely factual. It is one of those tales that falls within the ‘science fiction’ genre. ‘Virtual Reality Technology’- based computer program creates the people and events as though they happened. With this technique, a computer generates visuals that nearly seem to encircle the person seeing them. Nothing regarding the future can be anticipated. Technology and intelligence may let it happen, let us say, after a few decades from now. 
Do you think these opinions are biased? Write an article entitled ‘Virtual games are a reality’ in about 150-200 words. 
Ans- In today's digital age, virtual games have become a source of entertainment. Teenagers and adults alike are drawn to these immersive experiences, which simulate reality in ways that were previously unimaginable. With advanced technology, gamers can now engage with virtual environments using a range of devices, from keyboards to multi-modal devices that enhance the sensory experience. While virtual games offer unique benefits, they also have drawbacks. Action games, for instance, can lead to social isolation and aggression, altering the player's mental state and behavior. As virtual reality games continue to gain popularity, it's essential to acknowledge the fine line between entertainment and addiction. As we delve deeper into the world of virtual gaming, we must be aware of the potential consequences of becoming too immersed in a simulated reality.
-
Listening Task
Listen carefully to a text on ‘Tour of Body’ and answer the questions that are given below,
 The Cave-Automatic Virtual Environment is
Answer: (b) a three-dimensional virtual reality room
Projected image on the four walls of a room enables researchers to
Answer: (c) virtually get inside the molecular structure of cells and parts of the human body
The ‘CAVE’ is a boon to surgeons because
Answer: (a) they can treat diseases located in unreachable parts of the human body 
For the CAVE to develop a virtual environment it is essential
Answer: (a) to apply mathematical formulae
Once inside a three-dimensional representation of an anatomical structure, surgeons can 
Answer: (a) ‘move’ through and ‘peel away’ its layers
Dr. Szilard Kiss used CAVE to
Answer: (d) isolate the ridge of the scar tissue



The Frog and the Nightingale
CW – QNS
6. Answer the following questions briefly.
a. Support the view that the creatures of Bingle Bog liked the nightingale’s singing.
 Ans- The animals of Bingle Bog much preferred the nightingale’s singing. To hear the nightingale sing, they gathered in large numbers. Birds and animals gathered from all over to listen to her sing her beautiful melodies.
b. What are the different ways in which the frog asserts his importance?
 Ans- The frog does not appreciate the nightingale’s song when all the creatures of the bog like her voice. The assertive nature of the frog could be understood by the following points-
He introduces himself to the nightingale as the owner of the tree, the writer and critic, and the best singer.
He also offers himself to train the nightingale in singing and charges a high tuition fee. He makes her give musical concerts and charges an entry fee.
He compels her to give performances and take music lessons from him.
He reprimands her for not singing sweetly when the business crashes.
c. Why is the frog’s joy both sweet and bitter?
 Ans- The frog is ecstatic since the nightingale’s song allows him to make a substantial profit. Second, he enjoys the fact that he is successful in harassing the bird and driving her to death. His happiness is clouded by the fact that the nightingale’s voice has gotten worse with time and is now earning less money every day.
d. What was the frog’s ulterior motive in making the nightingale add fills and trills to her songs?
 Ans- The frog was angry because the nightingale didn’t sing sweetly to enable him to earn more. Secondly, her voice was becoming ‘uninspired’ as her song now zipped, trilled and bounced along.
e. Contradict the fact that the nightingale did not deserve the frog’s wrath.
 Ans- After the nightingale died, the frog ascended to the throne as the undisputed ruler of Bingle Bog. Now, no bird or other animal could match the frog’s singing ability. Second, he frightened every single one of them over there.
7. Discuss the following questions and write the answers in your notebooks.
a. Bring out the irony in the frog’s statement – ‘Your song must be your own’.
 Ans- When the nightingale claimed that her song was original, the frog replied that she shouldn’t brag about it and offered advice on how to become a better singer. After she passed away, the frog stole her quote and claimed hypocritically that he had taught her to write creative songs.
b. What was the purpose of the poet to end the poem in this manner? Can you suggest a different ending?
 Ans- No, the end is not justified because the revenge of the nightingale’s ruthless killing could not be taken as nobody could know the frog’s reality.
c. Do you think the nightingale is ‘brainless’? Give reasons for your answer.
Ans- Yes, the nightingale is truly brainless because she cannot understand the crafty scheme of the frog.
She let herself be dominated by the frog and trusted him blindly.
She was not confident about her talent and relied on the frog.
She was easily influenced by him and died of her foolishness.
d. In despising a melodious voice and being a crowd puller, the nightingale turns out to be a loser and dies. How far is she responsible for her downfall?
 Ans- Despite being a crowd-pleaser and an exceptionally talented singer, Nightingale completely fails to survive in the world of frivolities and value-less society. She ought to have been sensible and knowledgeable about the frog’s treatment of her. She could have been able to save herself and become a popular singer if she had been secure in her abilities and values rather than mindlessly following the frog. She has a major share of the blame for her awful demise.
e. Do you agree with the Frog’s inference of the Nightingale’s character? Give reasons for your answer.
 Ans- No, the implication the frog makes about the character of the nightingale is not entirely convincing to me. Although the nightingale is a gullible bird, the frog painted her as a greedy and untalented bird. The frog accused her of being stale, but she consistently won the hearts of her audience with her creative songs and music. She was much better a singer than the frog but he made her take lessons from him. The nightingale was depicted by the frog as being the complete antithesis of who she truly was.
8. The nightingale has scaled the heights of success. But now the audience is dwindling, the frog is unhappy and reprimands her all the time. She is mentally and physically exhausted and fears failure. As the nightingale, write a diary entry highlighting her fears and analyzing the reasons for her failure.
Ans-
16th Apr 2024, Tuesday
9.30 PM
I can still clearly recall the day the frog approached me and spoke such kind words to me. I was such an idiot for failing to recognise his ruse; I blame my dependent attitude. The frog is a huge fake, but since I was frightened and ignorant, I fell for it.
I can no longer sing as melodically as I once could, I observe. The clever frog collected a lot of money through fees. He intimidated and coerced me into singing for hours, ruining my wonderful voice. I now understand that the agony he inflicted on me was part of his plan to gradually kill me from exhaustion rather than for training purposes. Death now appears to be at the door.
The frog wants me to sing today, but I am too physically worn out to do so. I made a mistake by not casting any doubt on the frog’s honesty. He therefore unfairly profited from my naivety and drove me to my demise. I’ve accepted the possibility of what may happen to me shortly. I thus accept death, which is unavoidable, with serenity. I wish to spread the word that we should never blindly trust or believe in people.
Nightingale
9. Write an obituary for the nightingale. You may begin like this: May the kind soul……… (or you may make use of your beginning)
Ans- May the kind and innocent soul of the Nightingale rest in peace! The nightingale was incredibly innocent, modest, uncomplicated, and kind. She represented universal human principles. She possessed great virtue. Her absence from our community is always felt. She had nothing against anyone, but she had to pay for being naïve, obedient, gullible, and simple-minded. The Nightingale’s demise reminds us to be wary of those with sweet tongues who can change their demeanour at any time. The Nightingale’s sacrifice must teach us all something. We must avoid those who have frog-like traits.
HW – QNS.
2. The following is a summary of the poem but it is jumbled up. Write out the events in their correct order to form a continuous paragraph.
 a) As a result, her voice lost its beauty and the other creatures stopped coming to hear her sing.
 b) Soon the nightingale became famous and creatures from miles around came to hear her sing.
 c) All the creatures in the bog cheered and clapped at her beautiful song.
 d) He offered to train the nightingale so that she could sing even more beautifully.
 e) So the frog could sing unrivalled in the bog once more.
 f) The next night the frog introduced himself.
 g) The frog charged an admission fee and earned a lot of money from these concerts.
 h) A frog croaked all night in a bog, in an unpleasant voice.
 i) But the frog made the nightingale rehearse continuously in the rain.
 j) One night a nightingale began to sing in a melodious voice.
 k) Finally the nightingale burst a vein and died.
Ans-
 (h) A frog croaked all night in a bog, in an unpleasant voice.
 (j) One night a nightingale began to sing in a melodious voice.
 (c) All the creatures in the bog cheered and clapped at her beautiful song.
 (f) The next night the frog introduced himself.
 (d) He offered to train the nightingale so that she could sing even more beautifully.
 (b) Soon the nightingale became famous, and creatures from miles around came to hear her sing.
 (g) The frog charged an admission fee and earned a lot of money from these concerts.
 (i) But the frog made the nightingale rehearse continuously in the rain.
 (a) As a result, her voice lost its beauty, and the other creatures stopped coming to hear her sing.
 (k) Finally the nightingale burst a vein and died.
 (e) So the frog could sing unrivalled in the bog once more.
3. Now that you have read the poem, add more personality traits to the word web of the frog and the nightingale as depicted in the poem. 
 


Not Marble, nor the Gilded Monuments
Look at the following picture carefully.
What has Time been portrayed as? Why?
Ans: Time has been portrayed as a mysterious man wearing a loose cloak with a scythe in one hand and an hourglass in the other. Time is shown to have been fleeting fast. Time is the greatest conqueror
What are the other symbols associated with Time? 
Ans: Tides, bubbles of water, wind, sand, money, etc.
2
What are the things that last for centuries? List a few things around you that will survive four to five hundred years into the future.
Ans: 
Think of things that will perish and/or be forgotten with the passage of time. 
Ans: 


-
-
-
Based on your understanding of Shakespeare’s sonnet, answer the following questions by ticking the correct options.
The couplet in the sonnet reinforces the poet’s claim that his friend will_________.
Ans:  D. live through this poem
Choose the most appropriate collocation for the word doom, from the following:
Ans- A. imminent 
The poet’s tone in the poem is ______________.
Ans- (iii) loving 
The poem is set in ________________. 
Ans- (iv) the poet’s study where he is writing 
Answer the following questions briefly. 
Describe how the monuments and statues brave the ravages of time.
Ans- The monuments and statues brave the ravages of time. However, in the process, they get ruined, disfigured, broken or spoiled, if not taken proper care of. 
Validate the poet’s reference to Time, as being sluttish.
Ans- The poet refers to Time as sluttish because it ruins and destroys  everything. It spoils the marbled or gilded monuments. It discolours them, spoils them and ruins them gradually through its various agents or forces. These agents are like air, rain, natural vegetation, etc. 
Elaborate on the reason why wars have been described as ‘wasteful’.
Ans- Describing wars as “wasteful” highlights that all results of war are not useful. Wars lead to destruction, death, and loss of resources. All these things are negative impacts and so, wars are wasteful. 
The poet says that neither forces of nature nor wars can destroy his poetry. Even the godly powers of Mars are not going to have a devastating effect on his rhyme. What quality of the poet is revealed through these lines?
Ans- The poet is optimistic and confident in his ability to create enduring poetry. He believes in the permanence and immortality of his verse, a trait evident in his work. Like Time and Nature, literary art is immortal, allowing poets to live on through their creations for thousands of years.
Shakespeare’s sonnet has been divided into three quatrains of four lines, each followed by a rhyming couplet. Each quatrain is a unit of meaning. Read the poem carefully and complete the following table on the structure of the poem.
Ans- 
9
The poet uses alliteration to heighten the musical quality of the sonnet. Working in pairs, underline the examples of alliteration in the poem. 
Ans- 
Unswept stone besmear’d with sluttish time;
When wasteful war;
Nor Mars his sword nor war’s;
Praise shall still; 
Identify Shakespeare’s use of personification in the poem. 
Ans- ‘Time’ has been called a ‘slut’ and thus, personified. 
“The living record of your memory” has been personified here in the sonnet as a man. He shall pace forth against death, bereavement, etc. He shall live life even in the eyes of all posterity.


Extra Questions
The rich and powerful got ornate monuments made to _____ 
Answer: (iv) be remembered till posterity
The poet addresses his sonnet to _____ 
Answer: (iii) the person he loves
In the line ‘The living record of your memory’, living record refers to _____
Answer: (i) The sonnet the poet has written for his friend
Why do you think the rich and powerful people get monuments and statues erected in their memory? 
Answer: Rich and powerful believe that by erecting statues and monuments people will remember them even after their death. They do not realise that people will remember them for their deeds and not for huge structures. It is their pride and ego which makes them do all this
Why does the poet refer to Time as being sluttish? 
Answer: Time has been referred to as ‘sluttish’ because time waits for no one. It passes by. We have to learn to value time. Time treats everyone in the same way. It does not treat a rich and poor man differently. “Sluttish” can also mean whorish as time cares for no individual; it is immoral and will finally pass. The grand memorials will become eroded, and the people memorialised will eventually be forgotten. 

Ozymandias
Look at the picture given below : 

Write a letter to your friend about the sight you saw and your impression of it. You may create the necessary details.
Ans:
12, Malviya Nagar 
Indore 
24 May, 2023
Dear Ravi, 
This year, my journey through Egypt led me to a breathtaking discovery in the desolate desert. There stood two gigantic stone legs, trunkless, with a nearby broken face half-buried in the sand, exuding a sneer of cold command. The pedestal bore the name Ozymandias, proclaiming him "the king of kings." His haughty inscription declared, "Look upon my works, ye Mighty, and despair." But now, his legacy lies in ruins, his once-mighty visage crumbling into the infinite sands.

Your Friend
Chris
-
 Answer the following questions by selecting the correct options. 
The poem is set in _________________. 
Ans- (iv) a desert 
Select the option that includes the set of qualities that the poet attributes to Ozymandias, in the given extract.
Ans- (iii) haughty, self-serving, contemptuous 
In the line, “My name is Ozymandias, king of kings”, the poet makes an indirect reference to an ancient empire to remind readers that________________.
Ans- (iv) A monarch’s power is ephemeral 
The words ‘bare’ and ‘decay’ indicate that the mighty ruler has become____________. 
Ans- (i) obscure
The tone of the poem is ________________.
Ans- (i) mocking 
 Answer the following questions briefly.
“Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!” Who is Ozymandias referring to when he speaks of ‘ye Mighty’? Why should they despair?
Ans- All subsequent kings and queens who will reign after the King Ozymandias are referred to here. He says they can’t match his splendour and might, therefore they should be sad and give up. 
Bring out the irony in the poem. 
Ans: The irony in “Ozymandias” is clear: time and decay destroy everything, including powerful rulers. While tyrants should be subject to time, all humans face death and decay. The pedestal's message of "despair" in Ozymandias's works is ironic. We despair not at his power, but at how time makes everyone powerless, even destroying the statue.
The poem re-emphasizes the idea that political power is transient but art is eternal and it survives. Do you agree? Why/ Why not?
Ans: I agree that political power is fleeting, but art is eternal. The decaying state of the "king of kings" in the desert shows that no power can withstand time. Although only the shattered statue and its pedestal remain, art endures. The craftsmanship of the statue and its inscription have survived long after Ozymandias and his kingdom turned to dust. Shelley's poem suggests art is the most enduring way to preserve humanity's legacy.
Overarching ambition can lead to great leaders and their downfall. Substantiate your position in favour or opposition to this statement. 
Ans- I agree that Overarching ambition can lead to the downfall of a great leader too. When one is too ambitious, ambition gets the better of a person. For example, in the poem Ozymandias, the king/ruler probably became too concerned with his power and immortality and he became delusional that he too will perish. 
‘Nothing beside remains.’ What does the narrator mean when he says these words?
Ans- The narrator highlights the reality that human life is time-bound when he uses these words. Along with the ruler’s descent came a decline in both the ruler’s authority and popularity. In this universe, nothing is both immortal and permanent.
What message is conveyed through this poem? 
Ans- The poem conveys an important message that nothing lasts forever. Even the greatest kingdoms and political regimes are sure to crumble so one should never be proud of even the greatest fall one day or the other. So one should not be proud of oneself. 
Identify and rewrite the lines from the poem spoken by the narrator, the traveller and Ozymandias. What impact do you think these three voices have on the reader? 
The Narrator: The narrator introduces the poem by explaining how the traveller described his journey to the ancient land. 
The Traveler: In the desert, two large statues were missing their upper bodies. Nearby was a broken face with a scowl and a cold, authoritative look. The sculptor’s skill made the expression clear. The pedestal identified the king as Ozymandias, King of Kings, who boasted that future rulers would despair at his unmatched greatness.
Ozymandias: I am Ozymandias, king of all kings; feel despair by my might, which you can never equal, while you observe my creation.
Shelley’s sonnet follows the traditional structure of the fourteen-line Italian sonnet, featuring an opening octave, or a set of eight lines, that presents a conflict or dilemma, followed by a sestet, or a set of six lines, that offers some resolution or commentary upon the proposition introduced in the octave. Read the poem carefully and complete the following table on the structure of the poem. 
Ans - 
Complete the table listing the poetic devices used by Shelley in Ozymandias. 
Ans -

(or)

Imagine that Ozymandias comes back to life and as he sees the condition of his statue, realisation dawns on him and he pens down his thoughts in a diary. As Ozymandias, make this diary entry in about 150 words. You could begin like this: I thought I was the mightiest of all but…
Ans-
28 November 2024,  Wednesday 
6.30 PM
Dear Diary,
I was greatly misguided in thinking that I was the strongest of all. I now see how useless my might and power are against the passage of time. Being told that my command is useless makes me sad. The force of reality and nature is far greater than I had imagined. I’ve finally realised that everything on this planet will change, regardless of any individual characteristics or preferences. I’ve now accepted the truth that, although I may have been a brilliant ruler, bragging about it was wrong. Therefore, I believe that one should be humble and realistic about oneself. 
Ozymandias
‘Ozymandias’ and ‘Not Marble, nor the Gilded Monuments’ are based on the theme of Time. Compare the two sonnets in terms of how Time is treated by the poets. Write your answer in about 150 words. 
Ans - Both sonnets explore the profound influence of time over all living things. Time is depicted as an all-powerful, eternal ruler governing everything.
Shakespeare celebrates poetry and art in "Not Marble Nor the Gilded Monuments," asserting their durability against time and destruction. Throughout history, civilizations have seen devastating conflicts that razed towns, cities, and kingdoms, yet poetry and art have endured. In this sonnet, Shakespeare immortalizes his companion, affirming that neither death nor adversity can diminish his legacy. Future generations will continue to learn and appreciate his heroic deeds through the poet's verses, ensuring his memory persists until Judgment Day.
In contrast, P.B. Shelley's "Ozymandias" reflects on time's omnipotence. The poem portrays even the mightiest rulers like Ozymandias and their kingdoms as vulnerable to decay and oblivion. Unlike Shakespeare's optimistic view of poetry's endurance, Shelley's poem highlights the fleeting nature of earthly power and the inevitable decline of grandeur over time.
‘None are so empty as those who are full of themselves.’ Compare and contrast the characters of Mrs. Packletide and Ozymandias in light of this statement. 
Ans- Both characters are marked by vanity and self-importance. Mrs. Packletide's selfish ambition to outshine Loona Bimberton led to embarrassment, financial loss, and regret. Her jealousy and desire for publicity overshadowed her actions.
Similarly, Ozymandias was arrogant, conceited, and egoistic, behaving condescendingly towards others. He demanded obedience and instilled fear of punishment for disobedience. His belief in his absolute power ultimately led to his downfall and the crumbling of his kingdom.
Imagine the traveller of the poem writes a diary entry, narrating his impressions about the trunkless statue and feelings about being in the antique land. 
You may begin like this… The moment I saw the vast stretches of sand I couldn’t contain my excitement. Amid this sandy desert, I saw…
Ans -
28 November 2024, Wednesday
8:30 am
Dear Diary, 
The moment I saw the vast stretches of sand I couldn’t contain my excitement. In this sandy desert, I saw a ruined statue lying in the sand. The statue of a mighty king, Ozymandias who ruled his land with an iron hand. Even his damaged face bore the cruel expression and a chill went down my spine when I saw the words written below the statue. I shuddered as I read the lines carved beneath the statue. His vanity and haughtiness were evident in the remarks, but time had taught him that nothing was more potent than that. It was truly an eye-opener for everyone. Time is a powerful force that wipes out everything. 

Extra Questions
(b) The expression on the face of the statue is one of _________ 
Answer: (iv) contempt 
(c) This poem throws light on the _________ nature of Ozymandas. 
Answer: (ii) arrogant 
(d) The sculptor was able to understand Ozymandias’ _________ 
Answer: (ii) expression
(a) “The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed.” Whose hand and heart has the poet referred to in this line?
Answer: The hand and heart of King Ozymandias has been referred to by the poet in this line. Though he was a cruel and wicked king, he took great care of his people. 
(b) “My name is Ozymandias, king of kings Why does Ozymandias refer to himself as King of Kings? What quality of the king is revealed through this statement? 
Answer: Ozymandias was proud of himself. He boasted about his greatness. The lines show that he was an arrogant king and thought himself to be the greatest among all kings.
(f) What is your impression of Ozymandias as a king? 
Answer: Ozymandias was an arrogant and wicked king. He was proud of himself but he took care of his people. He wanted the people to see his works and praise him. He thought himself to be greater than any other king. 

The Rime Of The Ancient Mariner
Look at the picture carefully and answer the questions given below : 
What can you see in the picture? Does the man look happy? Give reasons for your answer. 
Answer: (a) I can see a man with a dead albatross hanging around his neck. The man seemed deeply distressed and repentant over his deed.
Why does he have the bird hanging around his neck?
Ans - The bird is a reminder of his evil action and symbolises punishment for the sin he had committed. 
Have you heard of the expression—‘having an albatross around your neck’? What do you think it means? Does it mean ………………..?
Ans - something that is with you all the time as a reminder that you have done something wrong.
What is an Albatross?
Ans -  An albatross is a white ocean bird with very large wings. It symbolises a thing that causes anxiety concern.
-
-
Here are some of the archaic words used in the poem; can you match them with the words used in modem English language that mean the same? The first one has been done for you as an example :
Answer: 
Using the words given above rewrite PART I of the poem in your own words. The first stanza has been done as an example :
Ans - 
An old sailor stopped one of the three people passing by, who asked: “Old man, with your long grey beard and glittering eye, why are you stopping me ?”
The man chided the mariner if he could not hear the happy sounds as he was a close relative of the bridegroom and the doors of the marriage venue were opened. He further added that the guests had arrived and the dinner was arranged.
But the old man held him with his skinny hands and said: There was a ship………………… The man at once freed his hand from the old man’s grip and said, “Stop you mad old man. Leave me”. 
The mariner hypnotized the wedding guest with his glittering eyes and the guest could not move. He listened to the old mariner like a small child of three and the mariner had his will. 
Not having any other option, the wedding guest, helplessly sat on a stone and so the ancient mariner spoke continuously.
The old mariner continued telling his story: We started our journey by the sea cheerfully and the ship sailed below the church, below the hill and the lighthouse top.
The sun rose every day from the left and set on the right after shining brightly for the whole day.
“Everyday the sun rose higher until it was just above our head at noon,” the old man dreamily said. By now the guest was getting impatient on hearing the sound of the bassoon, a musical instrument.
The bassoon itself signified the rosy bride had entered into the hall accompanied by a band of happy singers and musicians.
The guest was too eager to go from there and was cursing himself as well as getting irritated but he. had no other option than to listen to that ancient man who spoke continuously. 
The old man continued: “We were chased towards south by a severe and strong sea-storm that completely overtook us.” 
The old mariner recalled his horrible experience: “The ship’s front part dipped in the sea and the masts dropped down. The storm drove the ship southward with such force that the ship seemed to chase an enemy fiercely with a bent head. 
The old man narrated his tale of woe unaware of the state of the mind of the wedding guest. “It grew icy cold with mist and snow everywhere. The ship was surrounded by big, bright green pieces of floating ice. 
The ancient mariner said that the floating icebergs and their surface reflected the sunshine that made them gloomy. They could see neither man nor an animal as there was only ice surrounding the ship.
The mariner recalled that they could see nothing but ice all around them. The storm howled loudly like a man in a fit and the ice also cracked making horrible noises. 
Amid the havoc, an albatross came emerging from the fog. The sailors thought it to be a messenger of God and called it on the ship. 
The albatross ate the food that it had never eaten. It became friendly with the sailors and flew in circles about the ship. Miraculously, the ice split making a thunderous noise and the helmsman was able to steer the ship in the right direction.
The wedding guest exclaimed that God had saved the mariner from the devils that troubled him and other sailors so why was he looking so wretched? The mariner repentantly answered that it was he who shot the albatross with his crossbow.
Answer the following by choosing the right option from those given below: 
The Ancient Mariner stopped one of the three wedding guests because………… 
Ans. C he wanted him to listen to his story 
The wedding guest remarked that he was ‘next of kin’ It meant that …….. 
Ans. A) He was a close relation of the bridegroom 
‘He cannot choose but hear’ means
Ans. B ‘The wedding guest was forced to hear the story of the mariner.’
‘The sun came up upon the left, /Out of the sea came he; This line tells us that the ship…………………. 
Ans. D was moving towards the south 
The Wedding-Guest beat his breast because………… 
Ans, C the sound of the bassoon meant that the bride had arrived and the wedding ceremony was about to begin and he could not attend it. 
The storm blast had been described as being tyrannous because………. 
Ans. B it took complete control of the ship 
The sailors felt depressed on reaching the land of mist and snow because…… 
Ans. C they were surrounded by icebergs and there seemed to be no sign of life 
The sailors were happy to see the albatross because…
Ans. C it was a messenger from God and it lifted the fog and mist. 
The two things that happened after the arrival of the albatross were ……
Ans. B the icebergs split and a strong breeze started blowing 
‘It perched for vespers nine’ means……… 
Ans. B the albatross would appear at a fixed time every day. 
‘God save thee, ancient Mariner, /From the fiends that plague thee thus!- Why look’st thou so?’ means……….
Ans. B the wedding guest wanted to know why the mariner was looking so tormented.
Answer the following questions briefly
How did the ancient mariner stop the wedding guest? 
Ans. The ancient mariner holds the wedding guest with his skinny hand and shining eyes. 
Was the wedding guest happy to be stopped? Give reasons for your answer
Ans. No, he wasn’t content. He was the bridegroom’s next of kin. He wanted to attend the wedding. 
Describe the ancient mariner.  
Ans, The ancient mariner has a terrified appearance. He has a long, grey beard, dazzling eyes, and slender hands. He serves as the poem’s main character. He appears to be insane from the outside. When he is in the mood to recount his tales, he grips the wedding guest firmly by the hand. 
How does the mariner describe the movement of the ship as it sails away from the land? 
Ans The harbour gave the ship a hearty farewell, and the sailors cheerfully sailed by the church, the hill, and the lighthouse.
What kind of weather did the sailors enjoy at the beginning of their journey? How has it been depicted in the poem?
Ans. At the start of the voyage, the sailors were blessed with good weather. This is suggested indirectly at first and later joyfully conveyed, as it states in the poem. “Merrily did we drop,” it said. This demonstrates that they were content with the way the journey was going.
How did the sailors reach the land of mist and snow?
Ans. In calm conditions, the sailors set out from the harbour and sailed south for several days. Then the weather changed, and a storm drove them in that direction. They were encircled by ice that reached the height of their ship’s mast, as well as snow and sleet. Their ship was soon engulfed in ice. 
How does the mariner express the fact that the ship was surrounded by icebergs?
Ans. The mariner uses phrases like “ice, mast high, came floating by,” “as green as emerald” (denoting that it was reflecting the colour of the sea), “and through the drifts,” “the ice was all between,” and “the ice was here” to describe this in a very picturesque manner. It “cracked and growled, and roared and howled,” and the ice was there and all around. 
How do we know that the albatross was not afraid of the humans? Why did the sailors hail it in God’s name? 
Ans. The albatross once flew through the fog and boarded the ship. It came when sailors called it, and it ate food. As a result, it had no fear of people. Since it was the first live thing they had seen since they arrived at the ice-filled sea, the sailors hailed it in the name of God. There, the albatross appeared to be God’s emissary. 
What was the terrible deed done by the Mariner? Why do you think he did it? 
Ans. The mariner used his crossbow to kill the albatross. He shot it for a cause that he does not understand.
There are several literary devices used in the poem. Some of them have been listed below. Choose the right ones and write them down in the table as shown in the example. In each of the cases, explain what they mean.

Ans, 
-
-
Answer the following questions briefly
In which direction did the ship start moving? How can you say?
Ans. Now heading north was the mariner’s ship. The remark that the sun rose on the right (East) and set in the sea on the left (West) illustrates this.
Why does the mariner say that ‘no sweet bird did follow’?
Ans. The ancient mariner had killed the sweet albatross, so no “sweet bird” was pursuing them. 
How did the other mariners behave towards the Ancient Mariner at first? How many times did they change their mind about the Ancient Mariner? What does this tell us about their character?  
Ans. The mariner was initially criticized by the crew for killing the albatross, which they believed brought favourable winds. Later, when the mist cleared and the sun blazed, they praised him for killing the bird that "brought the fog and mist." However, when the ship became becalmed, they blamed the mariner again, hanging the albatross around his neck, believing it brought bad luck. This shows the crew's shallow and fickle nature, praising or condemning actions based on their immediate benefit.
How did the sailing conditions change after the ship had moved out of the land of mist and snow? What or who did the mariners blame for this change?  
Ans. The wind ceased to blow. The ship’s sails fell to the ground. It was as depressing as possible. The sailors blamed the mariner for killing the albatross. They thought that the holy bird had cursed them.
 What is indicated by the line ‘The bloody sun, at noon,/Right up above the mast did stand,/No bigger than the moon’?  
Ans. This sentence makes it quite evident that something sinister is about to occur. The heat has gotten out of control and could potentially endanger the lives of the sailors. The Sun was hot, huge and directly overhead. The ship was at a complete halt and there was no breeze. 
How does the mariner describe the fact that they were completely motionless in the middle of the sea?  
Ans. The following lines indicate that they were completely motionless in the middle of the sea – 
Day after day, day after day, We struck, nor breath, nor motion As idle as a painted ship Upon a painted ocean.
What is the irony in the ninth stanza? Explain it in your own words.  
Ans. The sailors witness several unsettling images, and the narrator is trying to imply that the ocean itself starts to decay. Probably due to dehydration, he feels the need to mention that. If they do not gain access to fresh water, the sailors will quickly pass away and experience hallucinations. 
What is the narrator trying to convey through the description of the situation in the tenth and eleventh stanzas? 
Answer: Through the tenth and eleventh stanzas, the poet brings out the condition of the creatures in the sea. As there was no breeze blowing, the creatures started dying. At night it appeared as though death was dancing at the gate of the ship. The condition of the sailors was pathetic. 
What or who did the mariners feel was responsible for their suffering?  
Ans. The other sailors believe that the shooting of the albatross by the mariner had caused them to suffer. He had killed the innocent holy bird.
Describe the condition of the mariners as expressed in the thirteenth stanza.
Ans. The lack of water caused the Mariners’ tongues to wither. They felt as though soot was choking their throats and were unable to talk any further.
Why did the mariners hang the albatross around the neck of the Ancient Mariner? 
Ans. They hung the dead albatross around his neck as a symbol of his guilt because they believed he was to blame for their issues. 
Consider you are an animal rights activist. briefly mention how you could cite this poem to propose your points in defence of animal rights.​
Ans, As an animal rights activist, I could cite "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" to show the consequences of harming animals. The mariner's needless killing of the albatross leads to severe punishment, highlighting the importance of respecting and protecting all creatures. The poem reminds us that cruelty disrupts nature and has serious repercussions, underscoring the need for ethical animal treatment.
Like part one, the second part also has several literary devices. List them out in the same way as you had done in question number seven and explain them.
Ans: 
What is the rhyme scheme of the poem?
Ans. The rhyme scheme is ‘abcb’ in four-line stanzas whereas, in six-line stanzas, there is a slight variation. It is either ab c b d b or a aa b c b.
Find examples of the use of interesting sounds from the poem and explain their effect on the reader. 
Ans: 
The poem is full of strange, uncanny or supernatural elements. Discuss how these elements appear in the poem. You should consider:
– the strange weather;  
– the albatross as a bird of “good omen”  
– the spirit from “the land of mist and snow”  
– the strange slimy creatures seen in the sea  
– the ocean appears to rot  
– the death fires and seawater being referred to as witch’s oil  
Now write a paragraph about the supernatural elements in the poem and how they add to the events that take place in the poem. 
Ans, Supernatural elements make the poem interesting and there are surprises and surprises for the readers. The poet could have said this very incident simply. Use of these supernatural elements such as the albatross being a sign of good omen, ‘the ocean appearing to rot’, ‘the death fires dancing’ etc keeps the suspense and thrill alive, besides creating a lot of visual imagery. 
19. After you have read the poem, discuss the following questions in your groups:
i. Why did the Ancient Mariner stop the particular wedding guest to listen to his tale?
ii. Why did he have to tell his tale to someone?
iii. What is the poet trying to convey through this poem?
Ans:
 (i) The Ancient Mariner stopped a man on his way to a wedding function to narrate his experience at the sea. Though there was no particular reason for the Ancient Mariner to stop the particular wedding guest, yet there seemed a kind of moral suggestion to love all men and birds equally. He did not want others to meet the same fate as he had.
(ii) The ancient mariner was feeling himself burdened with the crime of killing the albatross. Other mariners also felt that the he was responsible for their suffering. They hung the albatross around the his's neck as a reminder of his sin. Now in order to lighten his burden, he stopped one of the three wedding guests to narrate to him his tale of woe.

(iii) The Rime of the Ancient Mariner is a ballad. The Ancient Mariner committed a sin that was rebuked by all. He relieved himself of his psychological burden by telling his tale to the wedding guest. The poet associates himself with Ancient Mariner to tell this allegorical poem in order to convey a powerful message to respect all the creatures of the world.


Snake
Snakes generate both horror and fascination. Do you agree? Why? Why not? 
Answer: Though snakes are creations of nature, we are afraid of them. Snakes also fascinate us but we do not understand the beauty of nature, and being human, we have the impulse to kill it even though we are astounded by its beauty. Snakes are found in different colours and different sizes. They say that nature is more powerful than human beings. But still, they generate horror which is just because of small instincts of the natural world.
Read what W.W.E. Ross feels when he sees a snake and fill in the table given below : 

-
Given below is the summary of the poem Snake in short paragraphs. However, they are jumbled. Work in pairs and put the summary into a logical sequence. 
Ans- The correct sequence will be 
l. – (d) 
2. – (g) 
3. – (a) 
4. – (h) 
5. – (e) 
6. – (c) 
7. – (f) 
8. – (b) 
9. – (i) 
10. – (j) 
Based on your reading of the poem, answer the following questions by selecting the correct options:
'he lifted his head from his drinking as cattle do' - The poet wants to convey that the snake is_________________. 
Ans D drinking water just like cattle 
'Sicilian July', 'Etna smoking' and 'burning bowels of the earth' are images that convey that________________.
Ans. C it is a really hot day when the snake comes.
A sort of horror, a sort of protest overcame me' - The poet is filled with protest because____________.
Ans. D he wants to kill it so that it doesn’t return 
In the line 'And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders, and entered farther' the phrase snake easing' his shoulders means_______________. 
Ans. C moving slowly 
'He seemed to me like a king in exile…' The poet refers to the snake as such to emphasize that the snake______________.
Ans. D is a majestic creature forced to go into exile by man 
'I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act' -The poet is referring to_________.
Ans. C the act of throwing a log of wood at the snake 
Answer the following questions briefly:
Why does the poet decide to stand and wait till the snake has finished drinking? What does this tell you about the poet? (Notice that he uses 'someone' instead of 'something' for the snake.)
Ans- The poet decides to wait for the snake to finish drinking at the water trough, believing it arrived first. While holding his pitcher, he feels honoured by the snake’s presence, showing his respect and appreciation for nature.
In stanzas 2 and 3, the poet gives a vivid description of the snake by using suggestive expressions. What picture of the snake do you form based on this description? 
Ans. The snake was yellow-brown and soft-bellied when it emerged from a crack in the earth wall and made its way to the water trough. He discreetly lapped into his long, lean physique with a straight mouth and drank water softly through straight gums. 
How does the poet describe the day and the atmosphere when he saw the snake?
Ans. The weather was warm. Due to the heat, the poet was in pyjamas to fill his pitcher. It appeared to be a day in July in Sicily, with Mount Etna smouldering. When the snake came out of the fissure to drink from the trough, the environment was dark.
What does the poet want to convey by saying that the snake emerges from the 'burning bowels of the earth'? 
Ans - The poet describes the snake emerging from a dark pit, suggesting it comes from the earth's deep, dark fissures. This "burning bowel" of the earth is the same place from which Mount Etna's hot lava erupts, symbolizing the earth's inner core.
Do you think the snake was conscious of the poet's presence? How do you know?
Ans. The snake arrived very gently, draping his yellow-brown belly over the edge of the stone water trough. It was not aware of the poet’s presence. This can be inferred because it placed its throat on the wet bottom of the trough where the water was dripping and sipped into its long, slack body with a straight mouth. It was calm.
How do we know that the snake's thirst has been satiated? Pick out the expressions that convey this.
Ans. The snake’s thirst was quenched because, after consuming some water silently, he elevated his head “as cattle do,” expressed satisfaction, flashed his forked tongue from his lips “as one who has drunk,” and then started drawing his leisurely length in a circular motion. 
The poet has a dual attitude towards the snake. Why does he experience conflicting emotions on seeing the snake?
Ans, The poet feels conflicted about the snake. His instincts say to kill it as a danger, but he also wants to welcome it. He sees the snake as a guest and feels honoured by its presence, making him feel guilty for throwing a log at it.
The poet is filled with horror and protest when the snake prepares to retreat and bury itself in the 'horrid black', 'dreadful' hole. In light of this statement, bring out the irony of his act of throwing a log at the snake.
Ans, When the poet saw his "guest" leaving, he felt a protest inside, not wanting it to return to its hole. In haste, he threw a log at the water trough to kill the snake. Startled, the snake quickly escaped into the black hole. The poet felt guilty and blamed himself, wishing the snake would return so he could honour it.
The poet seems to be full of admiration and respect for the snake. He almost regards him like a majestic God. Pick out at least four expressions from the poem that reflect these emotions.
Ans. The poet has great regard and admiration for the snake. He treats it with the same regard as a visitor who has come to his watering hole to fill up. He lets the snake drink because it arrived before him as he “stands and waits” to fill his pitcher. The following expressions reflect his emotions- 
“like a god” 
he had come like a guest 
“like a king.” 
“one of the lords of life.” 
What is the difference between the snake's movement at the beginning of the poem and later when the poet strikes it with a log of wood? You may use relevant vocabulary from the poem to highlight the difference.
Ans. The snake calmly and gracefully descends to the water trough, and “trails his yellowbrown soft belly.” When the poet hurled a “clumsy log” at the snake, it “writhed like lightning and was gone into the black hole” after the snake had quenched his thirst and looked around like a deity before slowly making its way into the crack.
The poet experiences feelings of self-derision, guilt and regret after hitting the snake. Pick out expressions that suggest this. Why does he feel like this? 
Ans. After striking the snake, the poet experiences regret, guilt, and self-loathing. He attributes his decision to strike the snake to the voices of his education. How ‘paltry, how crude, what a cruel act!’ he muses. He hates himself, and a voice inside of him curses human education. 
You have already read Coleridge's poem The Ancient Mariner in which an albatross is killed by the mariner. Why does the poet make an allusion to the albatross? 
Ans, The poet blames his education for tempting him to hit the snake and hopes he won’t suffer like the sailor who killed the albatross. He sees the snake as a "king in exile" and wishes it would return so he could honour it. The poet feels deep remorse and guilt, relating to the ancient mariner who had to atone for his sin.
'I have something to expiate'-Explain.
Ans. Despite hitting the snake while under the influence of his education, the poet feels bad about it and wishes it would return so he may crown it like a king, but he misses the opportunity. He feels compelled to atone for this petty mistake. 
The encounter with the snake and the dual response of the poet to his presence at the water trough reflect a conflict between civilized social education and natural human instincts. The poet writes a diary entry highlighting how he was torn between the two voices. Write in his diary.
15th May, 1927, Thursday
6:50 pm
Dear Diary
I am both scared and fascinated by snakes, with my instincts clashing with my logic. Education has suppressed my natural affection for them. Even though I hit the snake using my education as justification, I regret it. In the end, my instincts won.
I am naturally kind and peace-loving, but education makes me act cruelly, pushing me to kill the snake for social acceptance. This inner conflict between my logic and instincts makes me attack the snake, only to regret it later.
Our logic and intelligence create fears and doubts, influenced by ignorance and brutality from education. Yet, our instincts drive us to do good deeds.
Alliteration is the repetition of sounds in words, usually the first sound. Sibilance is a special form of alliteration using the softer consonants that create hissing sounds, or sibilant sounds. Onomatopoeia is a word that imitates the sound it represents for a rhetorical or artistic effect of bringing out the full flavour of words. 
Notice how D H Lawrence uses both these devices effectively in the following stanza. You may record your understanding of the characteristics of a snake under the following heading
Sound
Ans,
In the line ‘Softly drank through his straight/ gum, into this slack long body/ Silently, the /s/ sound conveys the snake’s feature of the snake through sibilance.
Another example of the onomatopoeic word ‘slowly’ and /s/ sound indicates the use of sibilance, conveys this effect: ‘And slowly turned his head./ And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice a dream.’
Movement
Ans, 
In line ‘And trailed his yellow-brown slackness, soft-bellied down, we feel the onomatopoeia effect in ‘trailed’, ‘slackness’, and ‘soft-bellied down.’ We almost hear both the sound and the movement of the snake.
Equally in line ‘And flickered his two-forked tongue, /f/ sound (sibilance) and onomatopoeic effect in ‘flickered’ lend a visual and sensory movement to the snake.
Shape
Ans, 
By using alliteration, sibilance, and onomatopoeia, D.H. Lawrence has succeeded in creating a kind of visual and sensory effect on us.
In doing so, the poet has been successful in bringing out the image of the snake through sound, movement, and shape.

The poet has also used both repetition and similes in the poem. Pick out examples of both and make a list of them in your notebooks. Give reasons why the poet uses these literary devices. 
Ans, 
Repetition: 
Hot, hot day: 
Earth brown, earth golden;
Was it cowardice, was it perversity, was it humility; 
I was afraid, I was most afraid; 
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice a dream. 
Simile: 
As drinking/cattle do; 
And lifted around like a god; and I, like a second comer; 
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice a dream; 
And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken; 
like a king in exile; 
he had come like a guest; writhed like lightning. 
The poet uses alliteration to create a rhythmical sound effect and movement in the poem. The use of similes is effectively done in comparing two different things with similar traits.

The Dear Departed
Read an excerpt from the diary of a man of 72 years : 
What do you think is he feeling? 
Ans, He is feeling lonely and sad. ‘ 
What situation do you think leads to people feeling so? 
Ans, The Uncaring attitude of family and friends leads to this gloomy feeling. 
Can such people be helped? How? 
Ans, Yes, we can certainly help the lonely and elderly feel wanted again. Curative, presentative and rehabilitative measures should be the major concern while implementing any programme for the elderly. Clubs for the elderly should be set up where they can engage themselves in various activities that would help keep them energetic and boost their stamina.
Read the news story given below. 
What are the reasons for the old people being “abused, harassed and abandoned” in India?
Ans, The news is eye-opening in India, where children traditionally care for their elders out of gratitude. Extended families used to be the norm, with parents and grandparents revered. However, Western influence and declining moral values have led to old people being "abused, harassed, and abandoned." Social and economic changes have shifted the extended family system to a nuclear family system. This shift often leads to clashes between old people, who find it hard to adjust, and the younger, more rigid and insensitive generation.
What are the problems faced by the old people as a result?
Ans,
-
 Given below are the main incidents in the play. They are in a jumbled order. Arrange them in the sequence in which they occur in the play. 
Ans,
 Mrs. Slater discovers that grandfather is ‘dead’. 
Slater instructs Victoria to put her white frock on with a black sash. 
Henry wears the new slippers of grandfathers. 
The Slaters fetch the bureau and the clock from upstairs. 
The Jordans arrive and learn the details of their grandfather's ‘demise’ from the Slaters. 
The family sits down to have tea.
They discuss the obituary announcement in the papers and the insurance premium payment. 
Victoria is asked to fetch the bunch of keys to the bureau to look for the insurance receipt. 
Grandfather comes down and is surprised to find the Jordans. 
Grandfather comes to know how his daughters were in a hurry to divide his things between them. 
Grandfather announces his intention to change his will and to marry Mrs. Shorrocks. 
Read the given extract and answer the questions that follow. 
 Choose the option that gives the correct meaning of the word ‘delicate’, as used in the above lines
Ans. C. Tactful and considerate 
Complete the following analogy correctly, by using a word from the extract. new: antique::________________: delay  
Ans. Haste 
Select the TRUE statement, according to the extract
Ans. C. Mrs. Jordan wanted Jimmy to wear Grandpa’s slippers. 
Choose the option that correctly classifies the genre of the drama from the given extract. 
Ans. B. Tragicomedy 
Infer the playwright’s purpose of including some writing in brackets. 
Ans To give the reader a fine imagery of the scene depicted in the play.
(2) “Are we pinching it before Aunt Elizabeth comes?” 
What does ‘it’ refer to here?
Ans. It refers to the bureau belonging to Abel Merryweather. 
 How does Vicky conclude that her parents are ‘pinching it’?  
Ans. Vicky concludes that her parents are pinching it since her grandfather owned it and they are taking it without his consent now that he has passed away.
Mention the two reasons that Mrs. Slater gives for her action
Ans. Mrs. Slater always liked her grandfather’s bureau. After his death, she decided to shift it to a sitting room before her sister arrived lest she laid a claim on it.
What does it reveal about the difference between the attitude of the elders and that of Vicky?
Ans, While Victoria has a stronger sense of what is right, the elders are only interested in what they can acquire.
“Now, Amelia, you mustn’t give way. We’ve all got to die some time or other. It might have been worse.”
 Explain the phrase, ‘give’ way.
Ans. He means that it could be Mrs Slater who could have died or any other person instead of the old man. 
What prompts the speaker to say these words?
Ans. When Mr. Jordan sees Mrs. Slater crying, he tries to console her by saying these lines. 
 What does he mean when he says ‘It might have been worse’?  
Ans. Mr. Jordan means that it was okay if his grandfather passed away because he was old and he died peacefully. It would have been worse if any of them had died because they were still young and had children to look after.
What does it reveal about the speaker’s character?
Ans. Mr. Jordan seems to know how to present himself in such situations
Answer the following questions briefly
 How does Mrs. Slater plan to outshine the Jordans? What does it reveal about her character? 
Ans. Regarding her sister’s and her husband Jordan’s attendance at the grandfather’s passing, Mrs. Slater has her doubts. Mrs. Slater searches for it because she is concerned about her father’s insurance payment. She also removes the desk from his room. She made an effort to take control of all of his belongings before her sister arrived. She is a brutal and egotistical individual.
Why does Mrs. Slater decide to shift the bureau from grandfather’s room before the arrival of the Jordans? How does Henry react to the suggestion?  
Ans. Mrs. Slater wants to move the bureau down because it was an attractive recent acquisition. She also didn’t want her sister to even glance at it. Henry recommended that she and her sister split the father’s property equally
What is the reason for the Jordans taking a long time to get to the house of the Slaters? What does it show about the two sisters’ attitude towards each other? 
Ans. Jordans had to make arrangements for their mourning dresses before they could arrive at the Slaters, which caused them to be late. Elizabeth might need to have the ready-made altered as they did not fit her. There was competition between the two sisters over anything pointless. They were unable to stand one another
What does Mrs Jordan describe as ‘a fatal mistake’? What is the irony in the comment she makes on Mrs Slater’s defence? 
Ans, Mrs Jordan's reference to a "fatal mistake" is about Mrs Slater not consulting another doctor when their grandfather appeared to be resting. She calls this a lapse in professional etiquette. However, Mrs. Jordan is hypocritical because, while criticizing Mrs. Slater for not calling the doctor, she did not arrive in time for the serious event, which is ironic.
 Ben appreciates their grandfather saying ‘it’s’ a good thing he did. Later he calls him a ‘drunken old beggar’. Why does he change his opinion about his grandfather?  
Ans. When Ben heard that his grandfather had gone to pay his insurance premium in the morning, he replied, “It’s a good thing he did,” but when Victoria informed him that he had instead gone to meet Mrs Shorrocks, he said, “He’s a drunken beggar.” 
What change does grandfather make in his new will? What effect does it have on his daughters?  
Ans. The grandfather declared that he would take care of himself as he got older and that he would leave his riches to Mrs Shorrocks, whom he was being married to, the following Monday. He also brought up how eager both of his daughters had been to divide his estate while he was still alive. Hearing this horrified his daughters.
Bring out the significance of ‘Grandfather’s bureau’, in the play. 
Ans. The bureau, which was also a pricey item held by their father, is significant to how the plot develops because it contains Abel Merryweather’s will. The sisters competed with one another to be the first to obtain it. 
The character of Victoria is a stark contrast to that of her parents. Justify.
Ans, She understood the impact of her grandfather's death while adults were focused on their trivial matters. Despite her young age, she showed wisdom in her thoughts and actions. When the false rumour of her grandfather's death was corrected, she was the only one who found happiness, showing the innocence of youth.
Answer the following in detail:
Bring out the irony in the title of the play. 
Ans, The play's title, "The Dear Departed," traditionally signifies the loss of a loved one, causing sadness and reflection among those close to the deceased. However, in this story, the term is ironic because no one in the family had any affection for the grandfather who passed away. They are not mourning his death; instead, they are focused on practical matters such as inheritance and publishing his obituary. The family members are indifferent and even relieved that he is gone. Despite discussing funeral arrangements and belongings, they show no genuine sorrow. Mrs. Jordan, who had not visited her father in three years, appears solely to secure her share of his estate, emphasizing the superficiality of their relationship with him.
How does the spat between his daughters lead to his grandfather discovering the truth?  
Ans, The two sisters argue over their shares, revealing to grandfather that Mrs Slater's husband wore his slippers and they moved his bureau downstairs. This shocks him, realizing his daughter's wish for his death. He knows they value his wealth over him and see him as a nuisance. Mrs. Slater hastily pronounced him dead without consulting the doctor, then informed her sister and ordered mourning clothes, showing their disregard for his well-being.
Compare and contrast Henry’s character with that of his wife. Support your answer with evidence from the play. 
Ans, Mr and Mrs Slater are seen as a perfect match, but the reality differs. Mrs. Slater dominates their relationship, always insisting on having the last word. Henry obediently follows her commands, silently obeying when she asks him to wear his grandfather’s slippers because his own are torn. He defers to her decision to move furniture in her father’s room and never voices his thoughts. Henry is timid and avoids confrontation with his wife, rarely making eye contact with her.
Bring out the traits in Mrs Slater’s personality by quoting evidence from the play

WRITING TASK
Victoria Slater is truly attached to her Grandpa. As she sees the elders in her family quarrel over the inheritance, she is bewildered and upset by their attitude. As Victoria, write a diary entry outlining the incident and your feelings. (150 words)  
Ans, 
15 February 1920, Thursday
2:45 pm

Dear Diary
I’m so saddened right now to see how money can trump feelings, even those of blood relatives. My aunt, who hadn’t come to visit us in a long time, hurried over upon hearing the news, ostensibly out of love but really out of desire for Grandpa’s possessions. Mother is also identical to her in every regard. I found her behaviour towards Grandpa’s possessions and her hurry to take everything before Aunt arrived to be incredibly silly and startling. This ostentatious worry is terrible and incredibly grating. However, I’m glad that Grandfather is still alive and has come to understand everyone’s mercantilist mentality and outsmarted them in their schemes. I pray to God to give some sense to these people and they mend their ways. 
Extra Questions
!. What are the three things that Grandfather plans to do on Monday next?
Answer: Three things he planned to do are that he would go to his lawyer and change his will, he would go to the insurance company and pay his premium, and he would also go to St. Philips Church and marry Mrs. John Shorrocks.
2. “ don’t call that delicate, stepping into a dead man’s shoes in such haste”
(a) Who makes this comment? 
Answer: Mrs Jordan makes this comment
(b) What prompts the speaker to say this? 
Answer: She says this because Henry had started wearing their grandfather’s slippers even before he was medically declared dead.
(c) Bring out the significance of this statement. 
Answer: It reveals the pettiness of all the adult characters. They all are trying to show the others, in bad light. Also, here, it is truly in haste as the grandfather is very much alive and not dead. 

Julius Caesar
Consult a dictionary and find out the difference between 
Killing
Ans, ‘killing’ means : to cause the death of somebody or something
assassination. 
Ans, ‘assassination’ means : killing an important or famous person for money or for political reasons. 
Many popular and powerful leaders have been assassinated in the past and in recent times. Can you name some of them? 
Ans,
Mahatma Gandhi 
Indira Gandhi 
Abraham Lincoln 
Martin Luther King Jr. 
Rajiv Gandhi 
-
-
Answer the following questions by ticking the correct options. 
How does Caesar sound when he says, “Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to Night”?
Ans- a) worried 
Caesar’s reference to the senators as ‘graybeards’ shows his____________.
Ans- c) arrogance 
Decius Brutus changes Caesar’s mind about going to the Senate by appealing to his______________.
Ans- b) vanity 
Select the option that correctly displays the offer that Cassius makes to Antony after Caesar’s assassination
Ans- a) The conspirators would like to be friends with him 
Why does Cassius try to stop Brutus from letting Antony speak at Caesar’s funeral?
Ans- d) Antony is a good orator who can sway the mob 
What prophecy does Antony make over Caesar’s dead body?
Ans- b) Rome will experience fierce civil war in which many people will die 
After listening to Brutus’ speech, the Third Citizen says ‘Let him be Caesar’. This clearly shows he________________.
Ans- a) has not understood Brutus’ reason for killing Caesar
Identify Antony’s tone when he calls the conspirators, ‘honourable men’. 
Ans- d) mocking 
Antony’s reference to Caesar’s conquest of the Nervii is to _______________. 
Ans- a) remind the mob of Caesar’s greatness as a warrior 
Antony remarked : 
Mischief, thou art afoot, 
Take thou what course thou wilt!. 
What does this show him to be?
Ans- c) a loyal friend 
Answer the following questions briefly. 
How do the heavens ‘blaze forth’ the death of Julius Caesar?
Ans, The watchman saw terrifying things: a lioness giving birth in the streets, warriors fighting, blood on the Capitol, ghosts wailing, and the dead rising. Calpurnia also had frightening dreams. These unusual events hinted at bad luck, predicting Julius Caesar's demise.
What does Calpurnia try to convince Caesar of?
Ans- Calpurnia tries to convince Caesar that he should not go out of the house that day as some mishap may occur. She tells Caesar about her terrifying nightmares and believes they are a bad omen. She advises him not to leave the house for the sake of his safety. 
Why does Calpurnia say Caesar’s ‘wisdom is consumed in confidence’? What does she mean? 
Ans- Calpurnia says Caesar’s “wisdom is consumed in confidence” because he ignores the signs of danger and decides to go to the Senate. In her view, Caesar's overconfidence blinds him to the threat to his life. He dismisses waiting, fearing it would make him seem cowardly.
What does Calpurnia dream about Caesar? How does Decius Brutus interpret the dream?
Ans- Calpurnia dreamt of blood flowing from a hundred places and Romans washing their hands in it. Decius Brutus interpreted it as a fortunate dream, symbolizing a new era for Rome. He predicted great men would gather around Caesar, honoring him and holding everything related to him in utmost admiration.
What are the arguments put forward by Decius Brutus to convince Caesar to go to the Capitol? 
Ans- Decius Brutus is a cunning man. Decius Brutus argued that because the Senate had already resolved to give Caesar a crown, they might change their minds if he didn’t go. In light of this, Caesar decides to visit the Capitol. 
 Why is Decius more successful than Calpurnia in persuading Caesar?
Ans- Decius Brutus is good at flattery. He appeals to Caesar's pride, convincing him more than Calpurnia does. Calpurnia wants Caesar to stay home because of her nightmares, but Decius says they show Caesar's power and greatness. He boosts Caesar's ego, so Caesar decides to go to the Capitol.
What is the petition put before Caesar by the conspirators? How does Caesar respond to it? 
Ans- The conspirators want Caesar to call Publius Cimber back from banishment. They ask him to reconsider his decision, but Caesar refuses. He claims to be as firm as the Pole Star and won't be swayed by their pleas. If Metellus Cimber continues begging, Caesar will turn him away like a street dog.
Who says “Et tu Brute”? When are these words spoken? Why?
Ans- When Brutus and other conspirators stab Caesar, Caesar utters these words. In the Senate House, Caesar was stabbed, and Brutus follows suit. Caesar had not anticipated Brutus to act in such a sly manner. With his crushed heart, Caesar cries out “Et tu Brute” as he attempts to protect himself. 
In the moments following Caesar’s death what do the conspirators proclaim to justify Caesar’s death? 
Ans- Following Caesar’s passing, the conspirators assert that tyranny in Rome has come to an end. They yell out slogans like “Peace, Liberty, Freedom, and Enfranchisement.” Caesar was an outstanding leader, but some claim he had grown overly ambitious.
Seeing the body of Caesar, Antony is overcome by grief. What does he say about Caesar?
Ans, When Antony sees Caesar dead, he is filled with anguish. “O mighty Caesar!” he exclaims. "Are all your victories and riches reduced to this?" Antony says he knew nothing of the conspirators' plans and is ready to die at their hands, considering it a blessing to die by the same weapon that killed Caesar. Tearfully, he bids Caesar farewell, believing Caesar brought glory and victories to Rome.
Whom does Antony call ‘the choice and master spirits of this age”? Why?
Ans- Antony calls the conspirators “the choice and master spirits of this age”. He says this because they had just killed the leader of the Roman Empire. 
How do Brutus and Cassius respond to Antony’s speech?
Ans- After listening to Antony’s speech, Brutus assures him that even though the act seems bloody, their intentions were noble. Their pity for the common people of Rome overrode their pity for Caesar. Cassius offers Antony a new job in the government administration.
Why does Cassius object to allowing Antony to speak at Caesar’s funeral? How does Brutus overcome this objection? 
Ans- Cassius does not believe Antony should speak at Caesar’s funeral because he would influence the attendees’ opinions. But Brutus insists that Antony would only speak if they allowed him to, that he will speak first, and that his speech will list the reasons why Caesar had to be killed. 
What are the conditions imposed by the conspirators before allowing Antony to speak at Caesar’s funeral? 
Ans- Mark Antony was given the directive to only praise Caesar and not point the finger at the conspirators in his eulogy. He was required to address the crowd from the same platform as Brutus and explain that he was given permission to do so by the conspirators.
When he is left alone with the body of Caesar, what does Antony call Brutus and the others?
Ans- Antony begs Caesar to pardon him if he has been meek and compassionate with his assassins. Antony calls Caesar the most legendary man the world has ever known. He curses the men who have killed Caesar.
What prediction does Antony make regarding the future events in Rome?
Ans- Antony predicts that the Romans will suffer for killing Caesar. They will be cursed, leading to a violent civil war with death and destruction. Cruel acts will occur, and mothers will witness their loved ones being torn apart. Caesar's ghost will seek vengeance for his death.
What reasons does Brutus give for murdering Caesar? 
Ans- Brutus killed Caesar because he believed Caesar had become arrogant and wanted to rule Rome. He did it to protect and strengthen Rome. Brutus was even willing to die for his country. Caesar was respected for his bravery, but his ambition led to his death.
Who says, “Let him be Caesar”? What light does this throw on the speaker? 
Ans- After Brutus finishes his speech justifying Caesar's killing, the third citizen exclaims, "Let him be Caesar." Brutus declares that if he ever becomes ambitious like Caesar, the public can kill him too. He says he is willing to die for his country. The citizens are satisfied, praise Brutus, and show sympathy for his actions.
Why is Antony’s speech more effective?
Ans- Antony’s speech is more effective because it is genuine and emotional. He skillfully informs the audience that Caesar was not ambitious, having turned down the crown three times. Caesar brought glory to Rome with his victories and left 75 drachmas to each Roman in his will. He also gave his property and gardens to the public. Antony gains the people's sympathy by showing Caesar’s injured body. After his speech, the mob becomes furious and rushes to murder the conspirators.
What is the fate of Brutus and Cassius, at the end of the scene?
Ans- After Antony’s speech, the crowd is outraged and moves quickly to murder the assassins, setting their homes on fire. Cassius and Brutus, inside a tent, prepare to confront the enemy and discuss their plan. Despite intense arguments, they quickly reconcile. Cassius, unable to tolerate losing, kills himself. Brutus, troubled by Caesar’s ghost and sensing his end is near, asks Starto to hold his sword and runs onto it, killing himself.
Julius Caesar and Antony reveal something about their character in their words and actions. We also learn about them from what other people say. Can you pick out the words that describe them from the box given below? Also, pick out lines from the play to illustrate your choice.
Ans-
 In the play ‘Julius Caesar’, we meet the Roman mob. We find that as Brutus and Antony speak, the mob displays certain qualities and characteristics. Given below are some characteristics of the mob. Complete the table by quoting the lines wherein these are revealed.
Ans- 
Antony employs a number of devices to produce the desired effect on the mob. These devices maybe described as rhetorical devices. He first speaks in such a manner that it seems to the mob that he is in full agreement with Brutus about Caesar. Then step by step he moves away from Brutus’ position, depicting Brutus as a villain and Caesar as a wronged man. Copy and complete the following table by showing how Antony builds the argument in Caesar’s favour.
Ans:
 Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow:
 CAESAR Cowards die many times before their deaths; … Will come when it will come. 
 Choose the option that is relevant to [A] Assertion and [R] Reason. 
[A] A brave person dies only once. 
[R] A brave person faces any difficult situation or challenges. 
Ans- A. Both [A] and [R] are true and [R] is the correct explanation of [A].
The strangest thing that Caesar ponders is why___________. 
Ans- C. men are afraid of death 
What fears has the listener expressed?
Ans- Calpurnia has expressed a fear that the ominous signs during the night might mean that Caesar’s life is in danger. 
What is the basis for the fears expressed?
Ans- The basis of her fears are the unearthly events during the previous night and the strange dream which she had. 
Why has death been called a ‘necessary’end?
Ans- “Death, a necessary end, will come when it will come.” ( Julius Caesar) Human beings are motral and thus for them, death is inescapable. As Caesar explains in Julius Caesar, there is no use worrying about it. We can only live our lives to the fullest until then. 
But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar; … And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds.
select the option that appropriately fills the blank. parchment:_____________: will: testament
Ans- D. paper 
Antony says he doesn’t mean to read the will because
Ans- C. the Romans will grieve for Caesar’s death. 
What are the contents of Caesar’s will that he is referring to? 
Ans- Caesar has given seventy-five drachmas to every Roman. He has left all his walks, orchards on the side of the Tiber to the common men.
Why does the speaker read Caesar’s will to the citizens?
Ans- The speaker reads Caesar’s will to the audience to play on their sympathy, and to make Caesar look like a great, benevolent ruler.
Identify the option that this the technique used by Antony in the given extract.
Ans- A. reverse psychology 
Choose the option that lists the emotion of the citizens after listening to the ‘will
Ans- 1. Aggressive 3. Enraged 4. berserk 
Questions for Further Study :
a) Why was the conspiracy to assassinate Julius Caesar hatched? 
Ans- The conspiracy to assassinate Caesar was hatched to prevent him from being crowned the king of Rome. Brutus and Cassius had animosity against Caesar and they wished to have the control of Roman empire in their hands rather than with Caesar. 
b) Was Caesar really ambitious? Find evidence from the play to support your answer. 
Ans- Caesar was not ambitious. He provided Rome and the Romans several wins and triumphs. He was a compassionate leader and. He refused the crown thrice. Caesar had a lot of empathy. He was aware of how the underprivileged felt. He promised each Roman 75 drachmas. 
c) What was Cassius’ motive for murdering Julius Caesar? 
Ans- Cassius was envious of Caesar’s rise to prominence and power. In actuality, he didn’t want people to think of Caesar as the great global conqueror. He wanted to assassinate Caesar because he did not want him to have power over the Romans. 
d) Why was it essential for the conspirators to include Brutus in the conspiracy? 
Ans- Brutus was a fervent patriot who saw Caesar as a tyrant. Despite his close friendship with Caesar, he joined the conspirators to free Rome from dictatorship. He believed killing Caesar was essential for Rome's welfare and freedom. The conspirators needed Brutus because Caesar trusted him completely.
e) What were the mistakes made by Brutus that led to the failure of the conspiracy? 
Ans- Jealous of Caesar’s growing power, Casca, Cinna, and Cassius plot to kill him. Brutus, wanting to end Caesar’s rule, joins the conspirators. Caesar is taken to the Capitol and stabbed by Cassius and Brutus. Antony learns of the plot and asks to speak at Caesar’s funeral. Brutus agrees, and after his speech, Antony incites the crowd to attack the conspirators. Brutus and Cassius are driven to commit suicide. Allowing Antony to address the mob leads to the conspiracy's failure.
f) Comment on Caesar’s friendship with Antony. 
Ans- Antony, a close friend of Caesar, disagreed with Brutus’s claim that Caesar was self-centered and power-hungry. He argued that Caesar was willing to sacrifice his life for Rome. After Brutus’s speech at Caesar’s funeral, Antony delivered a powerful address, stating Caesar was not ambitious and had refused the crown three times. He revealed that Caesar had left 75 drachmas to each Roman. Antony stirred the crowd's emotions and displayed Caesar’s disfigured body. This speech turned the mob against the conspirators, honoring and respecting Caesar.
g) Write a brief character sketch of Antony. 
Ans- Antony, a devoted friend of Caesar, is committed to making him king. He is a great orator and enjoys celebrations and entertainment. Clever and persuasive, Antony tricks Brutus into believing he supports the conspirators after Caesar's death. He then delivers a powerful speech that reveals the plot against Caesar, showing his genuine care and desire for justice for his friend.
h) What is the role of Julius Caesar’s ghost in the play, Julius Caesar Julius Caesar? 
Ans- In the play "Julius Caesar," the ghost of Caesar appears twice. First, it silently stands beside Brutus while he sleeps in his tent. The second appearance happens during the battle at Philippi, where the ghost appears before Antony and Octavius without speaking. The ghost's purpose is to influence Brutus, who had joined the conspirators out of emotional turmoil over Rome's instability after Caesar's death. Ultimately, feeling remorseful and distressed, Brutus takes his own life with his sword.
i) Why does Antony call Brutus ‘the noblest Roman of them all’? 
Ans- Antony's use of "the noblest Roman of them all" to describe Brutus is actually sarcastic. He strategically refrains from directly accusing Brutus of falsehood, opting instead to gently and systematically provoke the crowd with examples. Antony skillfully shifts public sentiment by initially praising Brutus, then gradually revealing how Brutus' personal grievances—not Caesar's ambition—led to the assassination. This approach allows Antony to incite the crowd against the conspirators and seek retribution for Caesar's death.
j) How do Brutus and Cassius meet their end? 
Ans- Brutus proposes advancing their forces to Philippi for battle, but Cassius disagrees and walks away. Eventually, both Brutus and Cassius lead their armies to face Octavius and Antony at Philippi. Octavius' intervention prevents further conflict. However, Cassius' troops are defeated by Antony's forces in battle. Overcome with defeat, Cassius takes his own life. Brutus, feeling disheartened, also commits suicide using his own sword.
A reporter covers the event of the assassination of Julius Caesar in the senate. Giving graphic details and a catchy headline, write the newspaper report in about 200 words. 
Ans- 
End of a legend
Today was a dark day in the history of Rome. Julius Caesar, an accomplished son of the land, was murdered in broad daylight. Caesar came to the Capitol to be crowned the king. 
The details of his death are really disturbing. Metellus Cimber petitioned Caesar to overturn his brother’s exile in the early hours of the morning as he was just taking his seat in the Senate. Caesar declined to grant his request. Then, a large group of senators who were all involved in the criminal scheme gathered around him and urged him to revoke the order. When Caesar again declined, they all stabbed him with daggers that were concealed under their clothing, one by one.
Brutus was a close friend of Caesar’s. When Brutus, one of the assailants, stabbed Caesar, Caesar collapsed and cried out, “Et tu Brute”, meaning “You too Brutus” 
